Hypnosis 
A Comprehensive Guide 
Tad  James, MS, PhD 
with 
Lori Flores & Jack Schober 
with 
Lori Flores & Jack Schober 
Crown House Publishing Limited 
www.crownhouse.co.uk 
First published in the UK by 
Crown House Publishing Limited 
Crown Buildings 
Bancyfelin 
Carmarthen 
SA33 5ND 
Wales 
www.crownhouse.co.uk 
O Tad James 2000 
The right of  Tad James to be identified as the author of  this work 
has been asserted by him in accordance with the Copyright. 
Designs and Patents Act 1988 . 
First published 2000 . 
Reprinted 2000.2001.2002 . 
All rights reserved . Except as permitted under current legislation 
no part of  this work may be photocopied. stored in a retrieval 
system. published. performed in public. adapted. broadcast. 
transmitted. recorded or reproduced in any form or by any 
means. without the prior permission of  the copyright owners . 
Enquiries should be addressed to 
Crown House Publishing Limited . 
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data 
A catalogue entry for this book is available 
from the British Library . 
ISBN 1899836454 
Printed and bound in the UK  by 
The Cromwell Press 
Trowbridge 
Wiltshire 
Foreword 
Chapter 1 
Chapter 2 
Chapter 3 
Chapter 4 
Chapter 5 
Chapter 6 
Chapter 7 
Chapter 8 
Chapter 9 
Chapter 10 
Chapter 11 
Chapter 12 
Chapter 13 
Chapter 14 
Chapter 15 
Chapter 16 
Chapter 17 
Chapter 18 
Appendix 
Table of Contents 
... 
..................................................................................................... 111 
......................... 
Introduction
-The Mind / Body Connection 
1 
A Brief  History of  Hypnosis .................................................... 9 
........................................................................................ 
Trance 
17 
Milton Model Patterns of  Hypnotic Language ................... 27 
................................................................................. 
Utilization 
35 
Personal History ...................................................................... 41 
Pre-Talk and Suggestibility Tests ................................... 49 
Stages of  Hypnosis ..................................................................  59 
Ericksonian Methods .............................................................. 67 
Two Ericksonian Inductions .................................................. 81 
Ericksonian Interventions ...................................................... 93 
The Pendulum and Other Ideomotor Signals ................... 103 
Metaphors ............................................................................... 113 
Progressive Test Induction Based on Estabrooks ............. 127 
Deepening Techniques and Post-Hypnotic 
............................................................................. 
Suggestions 
139 
Elman Methods ......................................................................  149 
Developing Your Induction Style ........................................ 165 
Conclusion ..............................................................................   171 
..................................................................................................   177 
.................................................................................................. 
Bibliography 
197 
Index 
..................................................................................................  217 
Foreword 
I first met Tad James in May 1993, when I attended his Accelerated 
NLP Practitioner Certification in Irvine, California. I was present- 
ing  NLP  sales  training programmes at  the  time  and  decided it 
would be useful for me to get a qualification in NLP. However, I 
was a little dubious about the hypnosis part of  the training. "What 
use would that be to me?", I wondered. Still it was included in the 
price so I might as well go for it! I went along to the training with 
my complete knowledge of  hypnosis gained from watching stage 
hypnosis shows on television! I wasn't ready for the shock I got. 
The hypnosis segment took place during the last few days of  the 
training. I'd been in trance a few times, experienced arm catalepsy 
and thought it was a lot of  fun. Then, I watched Tad do a demon- 
stration, combining Time Line Therapy@ techniques and hypnosis, 
with a lady who wanted to heal her eyesight. She wore glasses and 
didn't  want  to any  more. I was transfixed by  the elegance and 
power of  the intervention Tad demonstrated. I was sold on hyp- 
nosis. Then I noticed something else. During the demonstration I 
had taken off  my glasses. And I haven't worn them since. I've been 
studying hypnosis and working with Tad from then on. 
What distinguishes this book is the depth of  study Tad brings to it. 
Here is a man whose library of  hypnosis books rivals the British 
Library! And he's  read them all! That's very important; most peo- 
ple with an NLP background only study the work of  Erickson. As 
you'll  learn from this book, Tad  has studied  the development of 
hypnosis from its inception  possibly thousands  of  years ago in 
Egypt  and  India,  through  the  likes  of  Mesmer,  Bernheim  and 
Braid, to the twentieth century masters Erickson, Estabrooks, and 
Elman (to whose work this book is predominantly dedicated). 
This book also conveys Tad's ability to take complex and diverse 
concepts and distil them down to their core essence making them 
simple  to learn,  understand  and  use. If  this book  is  your  first 
venture into the world of  hypnosis, then it will provide you with 
a good knowledge of the three main forms of  hypnosis, indirect- 
permissive,  direct-authoritarian, and  client-centred. This  makes 
the book an excellent introductory text for students just beginning 
to study the art and science of  hypnosis. 
I 
iii 
If,  on  the  other  hand,  you  are  already  knowledgeable  about 
hypnosis then you'll  enjoy  the fact that  this book  is  written on 
multiple  levels.  Look  below  the  surface  and  there  are  many 
nuances that will enable you to increase the elegance of  your work. 
Prime  examples  are  the two  Ericksonian scripts in Chapter 10. 
Here you'll  find a subtle cross-over between the indirect-permis- 
sive style of  Erickson and the client-centred approach of  Elman. 
Having used the scripts personally and taught them to hundreds 
of  students, they really work. 
Finally, this is a very pragmatic book. It provides the reader with a 
compendium  of   theories  and  techniques  that,  though  never 
intended  to  replace  hands-on  training,  gives  everything  you 
would need to begin experimenting with and practising hypnosis. 
As  you'll  discover  in Chapter 1,  the scientific community have 
recently discovered that the mind-body connection is real. It can 
be .found in  the  group  of   chemicals  called  neurotransmitters. 
When people begin to realize that the doorway to the mind-body 
connection is the unconscious mind, then hypnosis will be recog- 
nized for  the power  that it gives everyone over their mind  and 
body. You can start now by reading this book. 
Enjoy! 
David Shephard, PhD 
Master Trainer of  NLP 
Master Trainer of  Time Line Therapy@ 
Instructor of  Hypnotherapy 
Director of  Research and Training, The Performance Partnership 
Limited, London. 
Chapter 1 
Introduction-The Mind/Body Connection 
Introduction -The Mind/Body Connection 
You  are  about  to  delve into  the art of  hypnosis, surveying the 
techniques of  several  masters,  from  Milton  Erickson's  indirect, 
permissive  style  to  the  direct,  authoritarian  style  of   George 
Estabrooks. The power of  all these techniques lies in the connec- 
tion that you build with the Unconscious Mind
-your own and 
your client's. The secrets and benefits of  hypnosis lie in the trance 
state, and we will highlight the ability to produce deep trance phe- 
nomena. Your ability to move from the state you are in right now 
to  deep  trance  depends  on  the  rapport  you  have  with  your 
Unconscious Mind.  This  book  focuses on  teaching you  how  to 
work at deeper levels with your own Unconscious Mind and with 
the Unconscious Mind of  each of  your clients. 
The Connection Between the Unconscious Mind and the Body 
The  doorway  to  success in  hypnosis is  the Unconscious Mind. 
Your Unconscious Mind not only holds information that is outside 
your consciousness, but it also manages sensations and body func- 
tions. A moment before reading this sentence, you probably were 
not aware of  the feeling of  your feet against the floor, or your back 
against the chair. You have sensations coming to your body all the 
time,  but  you  remain unaware of  most  of  them. In  addition to 
managing all these sensations, your Unconscious Mind keeps your 
heart beating, your blood circulating, your digestion working, and 
your lymph system operating.. . and makes your eyes blink with- 
out  your  conscious awareness. It  is exciting to  know  that your 
Unconscious Mind manages all of  that with perfect precision. 
A  prime  concept  that  we  are  going  to  explore  is  that  your 
Unconscious Mind can communicate with every cell in the body. 
Until the mid-1980s, people could plausibly say, "Hypnosis is just 
in your Mind! It's  not  real." But  recently, due to  the  pioneering 
work of  Dr  Deepak Chopra, scientists have begun to realize the 
full extent of  the Mind/Body connection. Not only does informa- 
tion from  the Mind  affect  the body, but  there is  now  scientific 
evidence that your  mental processes, mental states, and  mental 
behaviors affect all the cells in your body all the time. 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
Information is carried within the body in  the form of  electrical 
impulses that pass through nerve cells,  or  neurons. Between any 
two neurons, there is a gap, or synapse. In order for impulses to 
travel along a continuous  path of  nerve cells,  something has to 
carry the impulses across the gaps. This essential task is performed 
by neuro-transmitters, which are chemicals that conduct electrical 
impulses across the synapses between nerve cells. 
When neuro-transmitters were first discovered, scientists thought 
they were found only in the brain. Later, it was discovered that 
neuro-transmitters actually connect all neurons in the body, form- 
ing vast networks of  'electrical  circuits'.  More recently, quantum 
physics and quantum biology tell us that neuro-transmitters bathe 
every cell in the human body. This new knowledge is the key to the 
Mind / Body connection. 
The Unconscious Mind not only manages sensations, movements 
and body functions, but it  also actually sends information that 
travels to and affects billions of  individual cells throughout the 
body, giving us health or dis-ease according to our Unconscious 
beliefs. Chopra describes this as your immune system constantly 
eavesdropping on your internal dialogue. 
From  the  point  of   view  of   hypnosis  and  Neuro-Linguistic 
Programming, your immune system is also eavesdropping on the 
pictures that you hold in your head.. . the sounds that you remem- 
ber  or  pay  attention to.. . the feelings  that you  have.. . and  the 
concepts that your mind considers. Through the conductivity of 
the  neuro-transmitters  that  surround  all  cells,  your  immune 
system is constantly affected by the activity of  your Unconscious 
Mind. 
There are many things we are conscious of, but the operation
-and 
health--of  the body is optimally a function of  our Unconscious. 
Hypnosis allows us to begin reaching the Unconscious Mind and 
utilizing the Mind/Body connection. This is the beginning of  our 
ability to manifest a number of  wonderful things. 
Introduction 
- 
The Mind/Body Connection 
What is Real? 
In considering the wonders of  how the Unconscious Mind works, 
we continually bump up against the question of  What is real? This 
is  strictly  a  question  of   the  Conscious  Mind,  because  at  the 
Unconscious level, nothing is 'real.' 
We  might also ask, "Is the Unconscious Mind real?" Because the 
word real means 'having substance,' the Unconscious Mind cannot 
be real! The next big question is, what is 'real'  about hypnosis and 
the connection between the Unconscious Mind and the Body? The 
answer lies in the fact that the bridge that connects the Body and 
the Mind is the same bridge that moves us from 'real'  to 'unreal.' 
If  the Real is the 'physical,'  we must consider the 'unreality'  of  the 
Mind. You  are  now  going  to be  able  to  enable fluid  change in 
people by knowing that All is Mind. 
To  put it another way, the lesson of  the Shaman is that none of  the 
world around us is real. When this statement becomes meaningful 
for you, you have grasped the 'unreality'  of  what we call reality. 
That is a high state of  awareness. Zen Buddhists meditate on par- 
adoxical koans  for  tens of  years to  get  to the realization that all 
reality begins with the perception and intention of  the mind. 
An  understanding of  'the  unreality of  reality'  will assist you  in 
working with hypnosis, because you will realize that the body is 
just as 'unreal'  as anything else. It can be changed very quickly, if 
not instantly. You  can therefore heal your mind and body at any 
time,  relieving yourself  of  anything from high blood pressure to 
low metabolism. 
Highlighting the question of  what is real, one of  the most intriguing 
instances on record is the story of  a diabetic woman with multiple 
personalities. When the woman was tested in her diabetic person- 
ality,  her blood  sugar was dangerously high. When she flipped 
into  another  personality,  which  was  not  diabetic,  an  attendant 
drew her blood  immediately, and  her blood  sugar was normal, 
without enough time passing for her blood  to be filtered by  the 
liver and kidneys. The question is, "What is the cause of  the dia- 
betes? What is real?" 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
Metaphysically speaking, the mind is one, but since most people 
don't  experience it  that  way,  the  division  into  Conscious  and 
Unconscious Mind is a useful distinction. In spite of  some behav- 
iorists'  assertion that we do not have an Unconscious Mind, the 
distinction can allow us to more clearly understand the operation 
of  the mind. 
Why do we Want to Learn Hypnosis? 
The  value of  experiencing trance  and  learning hypnosis lies in 
attaining power to heal our own bodies and guide clients in heal- 
ing theirs.. . power to learn.. . and power to create changes in our 
lives. 
If  you can produce hypnotic phenomena in yourself, such as arm 
catalepsy  (rigidity), major  muscle  group  relaxation,  full  body 
catalepsy, or somnambulistic behavior, then you have the power to 
produce healing changes in yourself. If  you can hallucinate a ten- 
nis ball, you can hallucinate a little PAC-man travelling through 
your body gobbling up cells or substances that have been causing 
dis-ease. If  you had severe muscle pain in your back, think what a 
relief it would be just to sit down and go into trance, or work with 
a Hypnotherapist, and say, "Unconscious Mind, go ahead and heal 
the muscles in my back." If  you have clear communication with 
your  Unconscious  Mind,  you  can  do  that.  There  is  now  a 
groundswell of  support for the healing powers of  hyp-nosis from 
the traditional allopathic medical community. 
In addition to healing, the Unconscious Mind opens new doors to 
learning. If  there is something you want to learn easily, you can 
say to your Unconscious Mind, "Let's  learn this," and it will sup- 
port  you.  If   you  are  concerned  about  a  presentation  you  are 
making, you can say to your Unconscious Mind, "Let's  organize 
all of  this to flow easily and effortlessly." Your Unconscious Mind 
will do all of  this for you. 
In trance, we can also tap into real power to create changes in our 
lives, healing what needs to be healed, preserving learnings from 
the  past, and  making new neurological connections to manifest 
our  dreams. For  these  purposes, I teach Time-Line  Therapy@ to 
Introduction 
-The Mind/Body Connection 
thousands  of   people  each  year.  If   we  have  rapport  with  our 
Unconscious Minds, we will have all the resources we need to cre- 
ate the future of  our dreams. 
Milton Erickson once said, "Patients are patients because they are 
out  of   rapport  with  their  own  Unconscious."  Hypnotherapy 
patients are  people who have had  too  much  programming
-so 
much outside programming that they have lost touch with their 
inner selves. People  who are in  rapport  with their Unconscious 
Minds are also in control of  their destiny. 
We are exploring hypnosis for two purposes. On the one hand, we 
are  learning  how  to  be  superb  Hypnotherapists,  able  to  lead 
others to the  rich benefits of  trance. On the other hand,  we are 
learning how to be very good hypnotic subjects, so that we can 
access those benefits by entering trance ourselves. 
Chapter 2 
A Brief History  of Hypnosis 
A Brief  History of Hypnosis 
Before we discuss how hypnosis works, I want to give you a short 
history of  hypnosis, so you will have a better appreciation of  the 
art  behind  the  techniques. As  early  as  the  1860s, Pierre Janet, 
Alfred Binet and Charles Fere began using deep trance to produce 
hypnotic phenomena. The early experiments succeeded dramati- 
cally.  For  example,  hypnosis was  used  to  create  a  lesion  on  a 
subject's  hand and then cause it to disappear. These early studies 
had tremendous implications for  healing our own bodies. Since 
the Unconscious Mind runs the body, hypnosis leads us to amaz- 
ing possibilities for physical healing. 
Hypnosis has been practised for thousands of  years. There is evi- 
dence in ancient Sanskrit writings of  the use of  healing trances and 
healing temples in India. Ancient Egyptian papyrus scrolls tell of 
the use of  sleeping temples and the use of  trance inductions for 
healing. 
In the 1500s, Paracelsus, the Swiss medical doctor who discovered 
the mercury cure for syphilis, was also the first physician known 
to use magnets for healing. He passed a magnet or lodestone over 
a person's body to initiate the healing process. People were cured 
of  many diseases by Paracelsus's work with magnets. 
In the 1600s, an Irishman named Valentine Greatrakes healed peo- 
ple by laying his hands on them and passing magnets over their 
bodies. They called Greatrakes 'the Great Irish Stroker' and he was 
famous for stroking or massaging problems out of  the body. 
In 1725 a Jesuit priest named Maximilian Hehl was using magnets 
to heal people. He might have remained unnoticed if  it had not 
been for one of  his students, a young medical doctor from Vienna 
named  Franz  Anton  Mesmer.  Mesmer  took  magnets  back  to 
Vienna for use in his practice. In those days, one of  the major inter- 
ventions in  medicine  was  bloodletting.  Mesmer  would  open  a 
patient's  vein  and  let  the  patient  bleed  for  a  while. When  the 
procedure was finished, he would make passes over the cut with 
a magnet, and the bleeding would stop. One day as Mesmer was 
bleeding a patient, he  reached  for  one of  his magnets and they 
were nowhere to be found. So he picked up a stick and passed it 
over the patient's cut and the bleeding stopped! What we would 
say today in terms of  hypnosis is that passing the magnet or stick 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
I 
A Brief History of  Hypnosis 
was simply a non-verbal suggestion causing trance to occur and 
thus causing the bleeding to stop. 
After his early successes, Mesmer made a claim that would later 
spark a great controversy, saying that it was not the energy of  the 
.    magnet that caused the bleeding to stop, but the magnetic energy 
that  came  from  the  patient.  He  called  this  energy  Animal 
Magnetism. The levels of  energy transmitted in mesmerism were 
not detectable by instruments of  the time used  to measure con- 
ventional  magnetism,  and  the  name  Animal  Magnetism  would 
eventually discredit Mesmer. 
At the height of  his fame in Vienna, Mesmer moved to Paris and 
became  a  favourite of  the French  aristocracy. In  the late 1700s 
everyone who was anyone went to Dr Mesmer for one of  his mag- 
netic cures. Mesmer became very successful.. . so much so that the 
medical  community  of   the  time  challenged  his  methods  and 
claimed he was a fraud. 
Mesmer  then blundered badly by  asking the French  king for  a 
Board  of  Inquiry.  The  Board  appointed  to  investigate  whether 
Animal Magnetism existed included three people notable today: 
the pioneering chemist Lavoisier; the famous American Benjamin 
Franklin; and a medical doctor who was an expert in pain control 
named Guillotin. In writing the majority opinion, Franklin said, 
"This fellow Mesmer is not flowing anything from his hands that 
I can see. Therefore, this mesmerism must be a fraud." 
Mesmer, thus discredited, left  Paris and went back to Vienna  to 
practise mesmerism or Animal Magnetism. From 1795 until 1985, 
the notion of  Energy as a healing art form was left out of  main- 
stream western medicine and psychology. 
However,  to  some  extent,  mesmerism  was  still  practised.  The 
Marquis de Pusseguyr in France coined the term somnambulist, 
meaning 'sleepwalker,'  which we still use today  to describe the 
deepest  state of  hypnosis.  De  Pusseguyr  chose  that  term  after 
he  noticed  that subjects in a very deep state of  trance were,  in 
essence, somnambulistic. Dr. Elliottson at London College adopted 
mesmerism into his practice and  was almost  expelled  from the 
medical community. 
Around 1840,  a  young surgeon in  London named  James Braid 
went to see a demonstration by a mesmerist named La  Fontaine. 
In  those days the mesmerist used to stand near the head of  the 
patient and  make downward hand  passes over  the body. What 
intrigued Braid was that  the subject's  eyes would remain in an 
upward locked stare, looking at the mesmerist. Braid realized the 
importance of  the eyes being fixated in causing trance. He coined 
a new term to describe the fixated state, which was neuro-hypnosis. 
Braid decided that mesmerism did not involve energy transfer. He 
surmised  that  mesmerism  worked  simply  because  suggestion 
caused the patient to go into trance. 
James Braid  wrote  the first  book  on  hypnosis in 1843,  entitled 
Neurypnology. In that book he clarified that the fixation on a single 
point or idea is what causes hypnosis to occur. Interestingly, Braid 
later  decided  that hypnosis was not  the right term,  and  tried  to 
change the name to monoideaism, which did not stick any better 
than neu ypnology. Thus the name hypnosis has survived. 
During the same period, James Esdaile, a medical doctor in India, 
wrote  a  book  entitled  Mesmerism.  Esdaile  outlined  the  use  of 
mesmerism in the process of  controlling and getting rid of  pain. 
He developed his techniques before the advent of  the anesthetic 
chloroform that would later be widely used in surgery. Esdaile did 
over  500   operations,  many   of    which   would   have  been 
extremely painful without an anesthetic.. . and found that many 
patients healed in less than the normal recovery time. Some physi- 
cians didn't believe Esdaile's  claims and when he came back from 
India he was almost 'drummed  out'  of  the British Medical Corps 
for suggesting that one could use mesmerism for pain control. 
I 
This debate would have gone on, but chloroform was discovered 
almost  immediately on  the heels  of  Esdaile's  return. With  that 
discovery, research on pain control stopped. 
In 1864,  a  doctor  named  Liebault,  in  the city  of  Nancy,  France, 
developed a system of  therapy using hypnosis. A medical colleague 
named Bernheim sent a patient with sciatica to visit Liebault, and 
the patient was cured almost overnight. Bernheim decided to inves- 
tigate this strange thing called hypnosis and soon after formed a 
partnership with Liebault to establish the Nancy School of  Hypnosis. 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
A Brief History of  Hypnosis 
The young Sigmund Freud studied with Liebault and Bernheim at 
the Nancy School and initially used hypnosis in his practice. In the 
end, Freud stopped using hypnosis. The reason declared publicly 
was that a young female patient had jumped up and kissed him. 
Freud professed to be shocked and concluded that hypnosis was 
far too volatile to use. The little known history of  hypnosis records 
a different reason why Freud stopped using hypnosis: his cocaine 
usage had ruined his gums, and his false teeth did not fit well, 
causing him not to speak well enough to induce trance easily. 
In competition with an excellent hypnotist named Breuer, Freud 
invented 'talking  therapy.'  Freud  said  that  his  talking  therapy 
would not be  a  therapy for  the  poor. It  would  take 100  to 300 
hours to effect a cure. His talking therapy became  psychoanalysis, 
and  this changed  the history of  European psychology. Freudian 
psychoanalysis became  the  rage  in  psychology  and  it  became 
inappropriate to use any other techniques. Consequently, hypno- 
sis was eclipsed. 
In 1890, just before Freud's rise, William James wrote the first book 
specifically on psychology, a two-volume work entitled Principles 
of  Psychology. This is a 'must  read' if  you intend to practise hypnosis, 
Neuro-Linguistic Programming or any other form of  intervention 
with clients. 
In the early 20th century, two main schools of  psychology developed. 
On one side, the followers of  Freud, along with those of  Jung and 
Adler, who were influenced by Freud, formed an analytical branch 
of  psychology. On the other side were the behaviorists, who reacted 
against the psychoanalytical processes Freud had introduced. 
Behaviorism actually began with a little-known American physician, 
William Twitmeyer, who noticed that if  you tap a patient on the knee 
with a hammer, the knee jerks. In 1902, Twitmeyer wrote an article for 
the Journal of the  American Medical  Association called 'The  Knee Jerk 
Reflex'. Included in the second part of  his article
-and almost over- 
looked
-was an intriguing observation: after conditioning the 
patient with repeated knee-taps, Twitmeyer would tell the patient that 
he was going to tap again, but would stop his hammer short of  actu- 
ally tapping the knee. And the knee would still jerk, without being 
tapped! This is a very early documentation of  stimulus-response. 
The  American medical  profession  may  have  missed  the impor- 
tance  of   Twitmeyer's  article,  but  a  young  Russian  researcher 
named Ivan Pavlov read  the article and  took  notice. Two  years 
later  in 1904,  Pavlov  published  his first article on 'Conditioned 
Reflexes'  with the Russian Medical Society, detailing his experi- 
ments  with  dogs.  The  path  of   psychology  has  progressed  in 
mysterious ways. 
Research  continued  on  both  sides of  the  Atlantic.  At  Harvard, 
Boris Sidis wrote The Psychology of  Suggestion, which is still a land- 
mark  on  the  topic.  In  Britain,  Milne  Bramwell  wrote  History  of 
Hypnosis in 1903. Bramwell described the hypnotic techniques of 
everyone who had preceded him. This makes his book a useful 
reference. 
.-- 
ments in hypnosis from a medical or psychological standpoint
until 1943,  when Clark  Hull  at  Yale  Universitv  published his 
J 
-- 
classic work Hypnosis and  Suggestibility. This book was one of  the 
first  psychological  studies  on  hypnosis.  One  of  Hull's  most 
important observations was that "Anything that assumes trance, 
causes trance." This  is a fundamental principle,  which makes 
anything possible in creating hypnosis. From this point of  view, 
NLP and even visualization are hypnosis. 
Many people who practise therapy say, "I  don't  use trance, I just 
use progressive relaxation," or  " I don't  use hypnosis, I just use 
creative  visualization." Clark  Hull  would  probably  have  said, 
"Both of  these assume trance. Therefore, they cause trance." 
Hull is also notable for his influence on the young Milton Erickson, 
who was present at some of  Hull's early researches. Erickson prac- 
tised  hypnosis almost daily from 1920  to 1980,  seeing up  to 14 
clients a day for 60 years. Erickson's  profound learnings were to 
change the face of  hypnosis forever. They will figure prominently 
in this book. 
George Estabrooks is another major author whose techniques we 
will  be  investigating. Whereas Erickson  perfected  the indirect/ 
permissive approach to hypnosis, Estabrooks typified the direct/ 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
authoritarian approach. We  will study both approaches, as well as 
some in between, in order to have access to a continuum that will 
serve all clients. An indirect / permissive approach will bring suc- 
cess with some clients, and a direct/ authoritarian approach with 
others. Therefore, it will be useful to have both in our repertoire of 
techniques for inducing trance. 
In  1957,  Andre  Weitzenhoffer  wrote  General  Techniques  of 
Hypnotism, one of  the most important books on hypnosis, outside 
of  Erickson's  work. Another major figure in hypnotism from the 
1950s was Dave Elman. He created a powerful set of  rapid induc- 
tion  techniques which offer  a  different approach  than  those of 
Erickson or Estabrooks. We  will devote a chapter to Elman's tech- 
niques. 
Leslie LeCron, in 1964, was also a groundbreaker. LeCron popu- 
larized  ideomotor  finger  signals.  NLP  Practitioners  as  well  as 
Hypnotherapists use these finger signals as a way of  communicat- 
ing and building rapport with the Unconscious Mind by asking it 
for answers. We'll  discover some of  LeCronls ideomotor signals 
and how they can be used in working with students to improve 
grades. 
Jeffrey Zeig,  head  of  the  Erickson  Foundation in Phoenix, and 
Ernest Rossi are two major contemporary writers and researchers 
on Ericksonian Hypnosis. Zeig  and  Rossi  keep  the Ericksonian 
legacy alive. Their contributions are drawn upon by thousands of 
psychologists,  psychiatrists, and  other  practitioners  throughout 
the  world  who  use  Erickson's  indirect/permissive methods as 
well as Estabrook's  direct / authoritarian techniques. 
In later chapters, we will examine wonderful therapeutic tools dis- 
covered and described by several of  the leaders discussed in this 
short history. 
Chapter 3 
Trance 
Trance 
Trance and Rapport 
The basis for practising the art of  hypnosis is an understanding of 
trance. Trance is the state in which hypnosis takes place. It is also a 
state we frequently enter in the normal course of  a day. 
My favourite example of  trance is on the elevator. You  get in the 
elevator and the doors close, and you look up and watch the num- 
bers flash: one.. . two.. . three.. . four.. . five.. . six.. . You're going to 
seven.. . . The elevator stops and the doors open, and you say, "All 
right.. . wait!. . . is this seven?" That's  trance. 
Even more familiar is the driving trance. One time I was driving 
along a stretch of  Canadian four-lane highway from Niagara Falls 
to  Windsor.  The  road  passes  through  beautiful  country  with 
majestic trees and a clear blue sky, and the air is amazingly clear. I 
was driving and driving and listening to my radio.. . And all of  a 
sudden my Conscious Mind clicked back into control, and I real- 
ized that I was 60 miles beyond my exit! The driving trance is an 
example of  the Unconscious Mind taking over to direct behavior 
that would otherwise be conscious. 
Probably the most common trance situation of  our day is watching 
television. Have you ever been watching TV while a person you 
live  with  was  having a  full  conversation with  you ... and  you 
turned  to  that  person  and  said,  "What...?" In  TV  trance,  the 
Unconscious Mind can take in and store long series of  images. If 
you're going to do hypnosis with kids, you can have them remem- 
ber their favourite TV show
-and they'll replay the whole thing 
for you. 
Trance  is  a  normal,  wonderful,  relaxed,  and  very  useful  state. 
People go into it all the time. There are key differences between the 
trance you go into with a Hypnotherapist and the trance you go 
into  in  the  elevator,  in  the  car,  or  in  front  of   the  TV.  With  a 
Hypnotherapist, you are being guided  into trance with a distinct 
beneficial purpose. 
A further difference is in the source of  the rapport. When you are 
in a driving trance, you are in rapport with the radio,  with the 
passing scenery,  or with yourself. When you are in a TV trance, 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
you are in rapport with the television. But when you are in hyp- 
nosis or hypnotherapy, you are in rapport with the person who 
has  assisted  you  into  the  trance;  and  your  Unconscious Mind 
opens itself to receiving information directly and uncritically from 
that person. 
We all go into trance frequently. The issue is whether we are in our 
own trance without a clear purpose, or whether we have chosen or 
been assisted into trance for  the purpose of  learning or therapy. 
This becomes a major factor for  you as a Hypnotherapist when 
your  client  is  in  a  trance of  his  own.  When  that  happens,  the 
client's  trance will not 'include'  you. In order to work with the 
client, you must first draw him out of  his own trance and  then 
assist him into a trance based on rapport with you. We will explore 
methods for doing this in later chapters. 
Rapport is the basis for success in hypnotherapy. It is the condition 
in which the client accepts our suggestions unconditionally, with- 
out resistance, at the Unconscious level. This enables the client to 
make the changes he wants to make. Rapport opens the door to 
trance,  the state in which  we  can  talk  directly with the client's 
Unconscious Mind. 
Experiencing Trance 
As a Hypnotherapist,  you  will regularly be guiding your clients 
into trance. Your success in hypnosis will increase as you grow in 
your own experience of  the trance phenomenon. Let your Mind 
consider that learning how to go into deeper and deeper levels of 
trance yourself is going to build your effectiveness in assisting oth- 
ers into trance. Milton Erickson would frequently hypnotize his 
students, as well as having them hypnotize each other. 
Many  first-time subjects  of  hypnosis are  surprised  to find  that 
trance feels normal and natural, and they remain in control during 
trance. Afterwards, they may  have a  perception that something 
'different'  has happened. The  event  may  be  a  little dimmer  in 
memory, almost like a dream state fairly well remembered. 
Trance 
When a client has remained sharply aware of  the process of  hyp- 
nosis taking place, he is likely to wonder what the difference is 
between being in trance and not being in trance. In later chapters, 
we will discuss suggestibility tests that will demonstrate the reality 
of  trance to you and your clients, and deep hypnotic phenomena 
tests, which will show you your own ability to attain deep levels 
of  trance. The more tests you succeed at, the deeper you can go. 
Stage Hypnosis and Hypnotherapy 
What about stage hypnosis, where people are asked to do things 
they would not normally do? Or would they? I have observed that 
many people who get up on stage to be hypnotized are extroverts 
who want to be the life of  the party. Stage hypnotists use specific 
processes for selecting their subjects. Typically a good stage hyp- 
notist will select those people who want to be on stage, either to 
show that they are good hypnotic subjects, or to just have fun in 
an uninhibited atmosphere where everybody expects them to act 
silly anyway. I do not believe that the people on stage are made to 
do anything they don't want to. They simply do suggested things 
under  the  direction  of   their  Unconscious  rather  than  their 
Conscious Mind. 
In therapeutic contexts, Erickson and other researchers were very 
clear on the fact that the client has total control. A client  under 
hypnosis will not do anything he would not normally do. 
Many of  the phenomena produced in stage hypnosis, such as full 
body catalepsy and amnesia for suggestions, have great value in 
therapeutic situations. Consider  a  person  with  a  back  problem 
who is able to attain full body catalepsy during trance. He is able 
to  actualize  all  his  muscles  becoming  totally  tense,  then  fully 
relaxed,  then completely aligned. Think how this might help in 
eliminating his problem. 
Amnesia for suggestions is often the key to dramatic deeper level 
results. If your client has a disease that he wants to heal and you 
do not want his Conscious Mind to get in the way of  your healing 
suggestions, you can give him a post-hypnotic healing suggestion 
and  instructions to  forget the suggestion  consciously. This  will 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
allow  the Unconscious Mind  to  do its inside  job  without Con- 
scious interference. 
This approach can also work with smoking cessation. Simply sug- 
gest that the client forget to smoke and consciously forget your 
instruction.  This  could  enable  the  client  to  forget  about  the 
behavior.  The  style  differs greatly between  stage  hypnosis and 
hypnotherapy. But many useful phenomena are common to both. 
A major difference between stage hypnosis and hypnotherapy is 
that in successful hypnotherapy, the deeper  levels of  trance are 
often not required. Erickson observed that we can get  results in 
light trance for some clients, while others need to go into deeper 
trance for the desired results. It depends on what the client needs. 
Most of  our clients will not need more than light trance to be able 
to actualize desired changes. 
On the other hand, when we can actualize hypnotic phenomena at 
all levels of  trance, we are in control of  our own Unconscious state, 
which  opens  a  full  range  of  options  to  us.  A  'runner'  whose 
routine is to run 100 yards a week could hardly claim to be a high 
performance,  all-purpose  runner.  Similarly,  a  person  who  has 
experienced only light trance cannot gain the full benefits of  trance 
for himself or for his clients. If  you have the full range of  hypnot- 
ic phenomena available in your hypnosis toolbox, you will be able 
to heal yourself and your clients in powerful ways. 
Trance and Learning 
You  may  notice  that you  are often in trance while reading this 
book. It is useful to be in trance when you are learning hypnosis. 
There is no need to be concerned about whether you are missing a 
number of  details  at  the Conscious level, because  your  Uncon- 
scious is recording everything that you are learning. 
Trance  is  the  most  important  thing  we  can  learn  for  learning. 
Because all of  our information is stored at the Unconscious level, 
trance can give us a steady state for recalling information. 
Trance 
In his Psychobiology of   Mind/Body Healing,  Ernest Rossi says, "All 
learning is dependent upon the state in which you learn." The best 
state  for  learning  hypnosis
-as well as other complex sets of 
skills
-is trance. If you feel that you are missing some details at the 
Conscious level while reading this book, that is perfect. It is your 
Unconscious Mind,  not  your  Conscious Mind,  that  is  going  to 
reaccess  your  learnings,  beliefs,  and  new  behaviors.  In  our 
Conscious Minds we may think, "I'm brilliant! I'm so logical." But 
it is our Unconscious that will reproduce and induce trance. 
Please enjoy using trance to learn. You  will be 'trance-formed'  by 
what I am suggesting. 
Now I would like to share a learning technique based on a simple 
form of  eye fixation described 150 years ago by James Braid, the 
inventor of hypnosis. You can practise this technique now. 
1 
Pick a spot on the wall above eye level that you can gaze at, 
so that your eyes have to go up. As you do this now, just let 
your Mind.. . relax. Notice that in a matter of  moments, as 
you focus on that single spot, you can begin to allow your 
awareness to expand outward into the periphery. Notice 
you can begin to see things in the periphery. In fact, you are 
sharply aware of  the things on the left side of  your periph- 
eral vision.. . and now, the things on the right side of  your 
peripheral vision.. . as you stay focused on that spot. 
I call this special state the Learning State. It is the first thing that I 
usually teach students when I want  to help them increase their 
grade point averages. When they focus on a single spot, they go 
into a trance that allows their Unconscious Minds to soak in all the 
information the teacher is delivering. 
Once you have gotten really good at holding your awareness on 
that one spot, then you can begin to move your eyes around, keep- 
ing your awareness the whole time in the field of  your peripheral 
vision. What I tell students is,  "Now you can look at me or  the 
teacher, but keep most of your awareness in the peripheral." 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
Learning is facilitated by the student's being in a relaxed, recep- 
tive,  focused  state. Here are  directions a  teacher  can  follow  to 
guide students in achieving that state. 
h I The Learning  State 
1 
Ask  the student(s) to raise and centre their eyes, as if  to 
look  at the space between their eyebrows. They  may be 
looking at a spot on the ceiling or on the front wall near the 
ceiling. (As an aid, you can tape a large black dot to the 
wall or ceiling for them to focus on.) 
Watch the student(s) for  the first signs of  relaxation. You 
will notice certain signs: a slower rate of  breathing, relaxed 
facial  muscles,  dilated  pupils in  the  eyes. To  avoid  the 
chance of  eyestrain, limit this eye-raising to two minutes 
or less. 
I 
1.      As you notice relaxation in a student, validate it by 
saying, "That's right. Very good." 
2.         Ask  the  student(s) to  remain  relaxed  with  their 
Minds relaxed, and to move their eyes down and 
focus on you (the teacher). 
That's  the Learning State*. It richly increases the students' ability 
to absorb and retain what is being taught. There is also some evi- 
dence that this technique may synchronize the two hemispheres of 
the brain. 
Most teachers are unfamiliar with hypnosis and will not recognize 
the learning state when students enter it right in front of  them. In 
fact,  if  they  are  paying  attention to  the  students,  they  may  be 
alarmed at signs of  trance. People often say, "We don't want teach- 
ers hypnotizing our kids." It might be more productive to train 
teachers to understand what they are doing when they are hypno- 
tizing the kids, in order to get the maximum learning benefit from 
the process. 
 Trance 
Now we are ready to discuss how you assist a client into trance. 
Early hypnotists spoke to their subjects in a very direct, authori- 
tarian  manner  to  induce  trance.  Milton  Erickson  preferred  a 
permissive,  conversational approach which  suits many  modern 
clients'  sensibilities. He found  that he could  induce trance indi- 
rectly  and  very  effectively  using  intentionally  ambiguous 
language that caused his client's  Unconscious Mind  to listen to 
everything he  suggested. The  language  patterns  that  Erickson 
defined are the subject of  the next chapter. 
*Adapted      from James Braid, Neurypnology, 1843, page 28: "...the eyeballs must be 
kept focused in the same position, and the Mind riveted to.. . one idea. 
Chapter 4 
Milton Model Patterns of 
Hypnotic Language 
Milton Model Patterns of Hypnotic Language 
In  developing a  permissive style  of  hypnosis,  Milton  Erickson 
found that certain language patterns would gain him rapport with 
the client's Unconscious Mind, without the need for more author- 
itarian techniques of  hypnosis. 
Earlier hypnotists usually began by saying, "Uncross your legs, 
put your feet flat on the floor, put your hands on your thighs, take 
a deep breath, and close your eyes," directing the client into trance. 
Erickson developed a completely different approach to hypnosis. 
Often he  would not begin  with a specific trance induction,  but 
would simply start a conversation. He would then seamlessly shift 
into a discussion with the client's Unconscious Mind, talking in a 
way that would allow the Unconscious to construct the pictures.. . 
feelings.. . sounds.. . of  what he was talking about. 
He might say, for example, "I wonder, as you sit here listening to 
the sound of  my voice, can you experience being more relaxed.. . 
now. As you notice that you're more relaxed, is it easier for you to 
go into a trance?" 
The key  to Milton Erickson's hypnotic language patterns is that 
ambiguity in any representational system causes trance. As you begin 
to think about Ericksonian hypnosis, and how to induce trance, 
ambiguity is the first and most important tool. If  you are used to 
using language as precisely as possible, intentional ambiguity may 
seem strange to your Conscious Mind. But  the ambiguity in the 
hypnotic patterns of  the Milton Model,  which we  are  about  to 
examine, excites the curiosity of  the Unconscious Mind and opens 
a direct channel to dialogue with the Unconscious. 
As an introduction to the Milton Model, read
-or even better, have 
someone read aloud to you
-the following passage, which is writ- 
ten in hypnotic, highly ambiguous language. 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
"I know that you are wondering ... and it's  a good thing to won- 
der ... because ... that means... you  are learning many  things ... 
and all the things, all the things.. . that you can learn.. . provide 
you with new thoughts, and new understandings. And you can, 
can't you? One can, you know. And it's much more helpful. You 
are sitting here, listening to me, looking at me, and that means that 
you can learn everything you need now.. . or you can learn in the 
next  two days. Do  you feel this is something you  understand? 
Because,  last week  I was with Richard,  who t 
training in 1983 in Denver, when he talked to some 
'A chair can have feelings.. .' You can hear that here. 
To see the details of  the language patterns at work in this hypnotic 
passage, examine the Milton Model below. 
The MILTON MODEL of  Hypnotic Language Patterns 
MIND READ: Claiming to know the thoughts or 
feelings of  another without specifying the process 
by which you came to know them. 
" I  know that you are wondering.. . " 
LOST  PERFORMATIVE: Stating  a  value  judg- 
ment without specifying whose judgment it is. 
"And it's a  good  thing to wonder.. . " 
CAUSE  & EFFECT: Stating or implying that one 
thing causes another. Stated or implied Cause  & 
Effect patterns include: 
a.        C    E (C makes E happen.) 
b.        E because C 
c.        If ... then ... 
d.        As you.. . then you.. . 
"Because.. . 
" 
Milton Model  Patterns of  Hypnotic Language 
COMPLEX EQUIVALENCE: Equating two things, 
or saying that their meanings are equivalent. 
"That means.. . " 
PRESUPPOSITION: Assumption. 
"You are learning many things.. . 
" 
UNIVERSAL QUANTIFIER: A set of  words that 
generalizes to 'all'  cases or 'no'  cases. 
"And all  the things, all  the things.. . 
" 
MODAL  OPERATOR:  A  word  such  as  'can', 
'might',  'should',  'must',  or 'ought'  which implies 
possibility or necessity. 
". . .that  you can learn.. . 
" 
NOMINALIZATION:  Changing  process  words 
(or verbs) into nouns. The most common nominal- 
ization is adding -ing to a verb to make a noun. 
"Provide you with new thoughts, and  new under- 
standings." (The speaker has changed the process 
words think and understand into the nouns 
thoughts and understandings.) 
UNSPECIFIED PREDICATE: Omitting the verb, 
or the object of  the verb, or both. 
". . .and  you can. " (Can what?) 
TAG QUESTION: A question added after a state- 
ment, designed to dissolve resistance. 
"Can 't you ? 
" 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
LACK  OF  REFERENTIAL INDEX: Using a gen- 
eral subject that does not refer to a specific person. 
Examples: people, they, it, one, that. 
"One can, you know.. . " 
COMPARATIVE  DELETION  (UNSPECIFIED 
COMPARISON): Using comparative words with- 
out saying who or what the comparison is being 
made to. 
"And it's much more useful.. . "(than what?) 
PACING  CURRENT  EXPERIENCE:  Describing 
what the client is currently experiencing in a way 
which is undeniable. 
"You are sitting here, listening to me, looking at me, 
etc.. . " 
DOUBLE  BIND:  An  illusion  of   choice  where 
either choice will lead the listener to do what the 
speaker is suggesting. 
"You can learn eveything  you need  now.. . or  you can 
learn in the next two days." 
CONVERSATIONAL POSTULATE: A question 
to which the response is either "Yes"  or  "No."  In 
allowing the client to choose his response, this pat- 
tern avoids authoritarianism. 
"Do you  feel  this is something you understand? " 
EXTENDED QUOTES: A series of  quotes embed- 
ded within one long sentence, where the speaker 
quotes one person talking about what was said by 
a second person who was talking about what was 
said by a third person, etc. 
Milton Model  Patterns of  Hypnotic Language 
"Last week I  was with Richard who told  me about his 
training in 1983 in Denver, when he talked  to some- 
one who said.. . " 
SELECTIONAL RESTRICTION VIOLATION: 
Attributing consciousness to an inanimate object 
or a mode of  communication to a creature that 
does not have that mode. 
"A chair can have feelings.. . " 
AMBIGUITY 
a. PHONOLOGICAL: Using two words with dif- 
ferent  meanings  that  sound  alike  in  the  same 
sentence; or using one of  them in a context where 
it could also be taken for the other. 
"You can hear that here.. . 
" 
"You can believe you're unconscious.. . " (The listener 
can hear this also as "You can believe your 
Unconscious.") 
b.  SYNTACTIC: Using  a  combination of  words 
that has more than one possible meaning. 
"They are visiting relatives." 
c. SCOPE: Using a modifier in a linguistic context 
where it is unclear which other part(s) of  the sen- 
tence the modifier refers to. 
"Speaking to you as a child.. . " (Who is the child?) 
"The disturbing noises and  thoughts.. . " (Are the 
thoughts disturbing?) 
d. PUNCTUATION: 
Run-on sentence: Using the last word or phrase in 
a sentence as the first word or phrase of  the next 
sentence. 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
"I want you to notice your hand me the glass." 
Pause at unexpected place: 
"As you read  this.. . book, you'll learn new techniques. 
" 
Incomplete sentence: 
" I  know that  you expect." 
UTILIZATION: Utilizing all that happens or that 
the client says. 
Client says:    "I'm not sold. " 
Response:      "That's right, you're not sold, yet, 
because  you  haven't  asked   the  one 
question that will have you totally and 
completely sold. " 
The next chapter provides a detailed explanation of  utilization. 
Chapter 5 
Utilization 
Utilization 
A prime element in modern hypnotherapy is utilization. As we dis- 
cussed  in Chapter 4,  earlier Hypnotherapists
-including Milton 
Erickson in his early days
-would say to people, "Uncross your 
legs, put your hands on your thighs, take a deep breath, go into a 
trance." 
Eventually Erickson learned by experience to direct trance less and 
less. He began to allow what would happen to happen. This is 
called utilization. 
As you begin practising hypnosis, you can get excellent results in 
the process of  inducing and deepening trance by utilizing  every- 
thing that happens. This means that you pay close attention to the 
things your client is doing and  saying. In  response to anything 
your client does, you can say, "That's  right." Weave smoothly into 
your conversation the things the client does and even unexpected 
things that may happen around you. 
I remember working one evening with a client I had led into deep 
trance. We  were sitting very near a grandfather clock with chimes 
that would  reverberate through the whole house. It was almost 
seven o'clock. As I sat in deep rapport with the client, all of  a sud- 
den  out  of  the  corner  of  my  ear,  I  heard  the  clock  make  that 
whirring sound it makes before it chimes. I thought to myself, "Oh 
no, what am I going to do? The client is in deep trance." As I heard 
the weight begin to move down on the pulley and  the hammer 
began to pull back, I said, "In a moment, you're  going to have a 
profound  revelation of  seven  ways  that  you  know  that  you've 
changed." And the hammer came down and sounded a profound 
Bongg!, and  I said,  ". ..one."  Bongg!  "...two."  Bongg!  ". ..three." 
Bongg! So utilize, utilize, utilize. Use everything that happens in 
the context of  hypnosis to deepen the client's  trance. When my 
clock client came out of  trance, she said it had been one of  the most 
profound experiences of  her life. 
Erickson was a master at utilization. He would use everything that 
occurred  in  trance. He would say  to  the client, "I'm  not sure if 
you've  noticed  this,  but your breathing has slowed down. And 
your  eyes  have  become  fixated  on  that  spot  on  the  wall.  And 
whether or not you've  noticed  this,  perhaps one or the other of 
your arms has become slightly stiff." Erickson would utilize every- 
thing that happened because he loved paying attention to things. 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
You can utilize everything that happens in the context of  a client's 
trance. For example, if  you see something that the client is about to 
do, tell the client to do it. And when they do it, simply say "That's 
right." That's utilization. 
Let us suppose that you say to your client, "In a moment you're 
going  to  blink." (That  is  an  automatic thing  that  will  happen 
whether you talk about it or not.) After a long or a short moment, 
the client will blink, and you say "That's  right!" When the client 
blinks,  their Unconscious Mind begins to accept the idea that it 
triggered the blink in response to your suggestion. And in accept- 
ing the suggestion to blink, the client's Unconscious becomes more 
accepting to additional suggestions. Utilization is powerful. 
The focus on paying attention to even tiny things that the client 
does is very important. Psychoanalysis attempted to do away with 
this. The psychoanalyst would sit at the head of  the couch with the 
patient facing away from him, and neither would see the other. 
Erickson initially came under a great deal of  criticism for suggest- 
ing that the therapist look at the client and observe certain things. 
And this practice added greatly to his effectiveness. 
So  I suggest that you look at your clients while you're  working 
with them in hypnosis. It is a good idea to have your chair at a 90 
to 135 degree angle to the client's chair, for two reasons. First, this 
angle will enable you to take full advantage of  peripheral vision, 
noticing anything from the events in the room to the rise and fall 
of  the client's chest as they breathe. Second, this angle will enable 
the client to have space
-avoiding any feelings of invasion-and 
feel safe; this will strengthen your rapport with the client. And you 
will be paying attention to the client. 
A special variety of  utilization is the use of  convincers to build the 
client's belief in the reality of  trance. People often expect trance to 
be something remarkably different from anything they have expe- 
rienced. They  may  discount the level of  trance  that  they  attain 
because it feels so familiar. As often as I tell my clients, "Trance is 
a normal state. It's  going to feel very familiar," they sometimes 
have doubts about whether anything is really happening. 
Utilization 
A convincer has the purpose of  showing the client that they are or 
have been in trance. The best convincer is the client's own behav- 
ior,  preferably  an  action  or  behavior  in  which  there  is  some 
dissonance  between  the  Conscious Mind  and  the  Unconscious 
Mind. For example, when a client has arm catalepsy, you can have 
them open their eyes and look at their rigid, raised arm. When you 
then ask the client, "Are you in trance?" they have a solid convincer. 
Likewise, you can notice certain things clients are about to do even 
before they become aware of  them. You  can ask them to do those 
things, and as they act, apparently in response to your suggestion, 
and you say "That's right," their own behavior becomes a convin- 
cer that they are following your suggestions. 
Our emphasis on utilization stems from Erickson's discoveries of 
its great power. But utilization works equally well with the tech- 
niques  of  the  other  masters whose  work  we  will  discuss.  The 
following exercise will  allow  you  to experience the  naturalness 
and  the  effectiveness  of  utilization.  Do  it  with  a  partner  who 
shares your interest in hypnosis. 
Utilization Exercise for Two People 
One person will act as the Hypnotherapist, the other as 
the Client. The Hypnotherapist sits across from the Client 
at a comfortable 130-degree angle, and goes into rapport 
with the Client. From an NLP point of  view, this means 
matching the Client's  physiology: sit  the same  way  the 
Client is sitting; match the Client's  head  tilt,  breathing, 
posture,  even  the  angle  of  their spine. As  you  do  this, 
Hypnotherapist, go into a trance. 
If  you  are in  rapport  with  the Client,  and  you  are in a 
trance, then the Client will go into a trance too. Every time 
you notice that the Client is doing anything that looks like 
going into a trance, utilize what you see by saying, "That's 
right." You  will  only  use  two  words  during  this entire 
trance induction: "That's right. " 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
Client, notice how somebody saying "That's  right" to you 
when you produce trance behavior amplifies your trance. 
After 5 minutes, reverse roles, so that each of  you has expe- 
rienced  utilization  both  as  the  Hypnotherapist  and  the 
Client. 
Chapter 6 
Personal History 
Personal  History 
Questioning Techniques 
At the beginning of  your first session with a new client, you need 
to gather detailed information about events in the client's life lead- 
ing up to his reasons for seeking your help. Ask questions based 
on the client's  presenting  problem  and questions about what they 
want to change. The time you spend asking questions is an excel- 
lent time to establish rapport. 
I recommend the set of  questions below, which will lead you to the 
client's  presenting  problem  and  its  root  cause. As  you  ask  the 
questions, observe whether the answers suggest that the client is 
at cause or at effect in the events that shape his life. In other words, 
does the client perceive that they are in control of  the direction 
their life is taking, or that outside forces determine what happens 
to them? 
Questions for Obtaining Detailed  Personal History  
Why are you here? Why else? Why else? 
Elicit all of  the reasons the client has come to see 
you. 
How do you know you have this problem? 
Elicit the client's strategy for having the problem 
and any diagnoses made. 
How long have you had the problem? 
Was there a time when you didn't have it? 
What have you done about it? 
What happened the first time you had the problem? 
What emotions were present? 
What events have happened since then? 
What emotions were present? 
In each of  these events, what is the relationship 
between the event and your current situation in 
life? 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
Tell me about your parents, brothers, sisters, and 
so on. What is the relationship between this person 
(each one) and your current situation? 
Tell me about your childhood in relationship to 
this problem. 
Is there a purpose for having this problem? 
Ask your Unconscious Mind. 
When did you choose to have this situation cre- 
ated? Why? Ask your Unconscious Mind. 
Is there something your Unconscious Mind wants 
you to know, or is there something you're not get- 
ting which, if  you got it, would allow the problem 
to disappear? 
Is it OK with your Unconscious Mind to support 
us in removing this problem today, and to allow 
you to have an undeniable experience of  the prob- 
lem disappearing, when we have completed the 
session? 
This set of  questions is designed to draw answers from the client 
that  will clearly show you  what interventions during hypnosis 
will be the most useful. Pay attention to everything the client tells 
you. As you take notes, keep in mind that every presenting  problem 
is an example of  something. To identify higher level presenting prob- 
lems that the client is not consciously aware of, you can ask, "What 
is this an example of?" To get more detail on the effects of  a major 
presenting problem, ask, "Can you give me an example of  that?" 
In this way, you will be moving up and down a hierarchy of  issues 
structured like this: 
Personal History 
GREATER PROBLEM 
................................................................. 
I 
I  Example 
1 
Example 
[ 
Example       Example      Example  I 
Time-Line Therapp Master Practitioner Training provides excel- 
lent  practice  in  obtaining  a  detailed  personal history.  Another 
good source is Dr A.M. Krasner's  book The Wizard Within, where 
he outlines a way of  asking the client very specific questions about 
the presenting problem. If  you have learned NLP, you can use the 
questions that are "The Keys To  An Achievable Outcome." As a 
Hypnotherapist,  you  need  to  get  a clear  idea  of  the  presenting 
problem and what intervention is likely to help the client in resolv- 
ing it. For this purpose, the personal history is your best tool. 
Using the Meta Model 
As  the client  answers  your  questions on  their  personal history, 
they  will  frequently  generalize,  distort  information  (usually 
unintentionally), and leave out details. You  can elicit the detailed 
information you need by using the Meta Model, an NLP system 
of  language  patterns and  clarifying questions. The  patterns are 
common  language  changes that 'hide'  information  the speaker 
does not want to acknowledge or communicate, either consciously 
or  unconsciously.  The  questions  are  designed  to  recover  the 
hidden information. The Meta  Model is mapped on the follow- 
ing pages. 
Response 
Prediction 
Pattern 
DISTORTIONS 
1. Mind Reading: Claiming to know someone's 
internal state, e.g.: "You don't like me." 
"How do you know I don't like you?"          Recovers source of  the information. 
2. Lost Performative: Value judgments where the 
person doing the judging is left out, e.g.: "It's bad 
to be inconsistent." 
"Who says it's bad?" "According to whom?" 
"How do you know it's  bad?" 
Gathers evidence. Recovers source 
of  belief, the Performative, or the 
strategy for the belief. 
3. Cause
-Effect: Where cause is wrongly put out- 
side the self, e.g.: "You make me sad." 
Recovers the choice. 
"How does what I'm doing cause you to 
choose to feel sad?" 
"How, specifically?" 
4. Complex Equivalence: Where two experiences 
are interpreted as being synonymous, e.g.: "She's 
always yelling at me, she doesn't  like me." 
"How does her yelling mean that she 
doesn't. ..?" "Have you ever yelled at some- 
one you liked?" 
Recovers Complex Equivalence or 
counter example. 
5. Presuppositions, e.g.: "If  my husband knew 
how much I suffered, he wouldn't do that." 
There are 3 Presuppositions in this sentence: (1) I 
suffer, (2) My husband acts in some way, and (3) 
My husband doesn't  know I suffer. 
(1) "How do you choose to suffer?" 
(2) "How is he (re)acting?" 
(3) "How do you know he doesn't know?" 
Specifies the choice and the verb 
and what he does. 
Recovers the Internal Represent- 
ation and the Complex 
Equivalence. 
GENERALIZATIONS 
6. Universal Quantifiers: Universal 
Generalizations such as 'all',  'every',  'never', 
'everyone1, 'no  one',  etc, e.g.: "She never listens to 
me." 
Find Counter Examples. 
Recovers Counter Examples, 
Effects, Outcomes. 
"Never?" 
"What would happen if  she did?" 
7.  Modal Operators: 
a. Modal Operators of  Necessity, such as 'should', 
'shouldn't',  'must',  'must  not', 'have  to',  'need  to', 
'it is necessary',  e.g.: "I have to take care of  her." 
a. "What would happen if  you didn't?" 
("What would happen if  you did?") 
Also, "Or?" 
Recovers Effects, Outcome. 
b. Modal Operators of  Possibility (or 
Impossibility), such as 'can'/'canJt',  'will'/'won't', 
'may'  /'may  not',  'possible' / 'impossible',  eg.: "I 
can't  tell him the truth." 
b. "What prevents you?" ("What would 
happen if  you did?") 
Recovers Causes. 
DELETIONS 
8.  Nominalizations: Process words which have 
been frozen in time, making them nouns, e.g.: 
"There is no communication here." 
"Who's not communicating what to 
whom?" "How would you like to 
communicate?" 
Turns it back into a process, recov- 
ers deletion and reference. 
9.  Unspecified Verbs, e.g.: "He rejected me." 
"How, specifically?" 
Specifies the verb. 
10. Simple Deletions: 
a. Of  person or thing, e.g.: "I am uncomfortable."     a. "About what/ whom?" 
b. "Who, specifically, doesn't  listen to you?" 
a. Recovers Deletion. 
b. Recovers Referential Index. 
b. Lack of  Referential Index: Fails to specify a per- 
son or thing, e.g.: "They don't  listen to me." 
c.  Comparative Deletions: As in good, better, 
best, worst, more, less, most, least, e.g.: "She's  a 
better person." 
c. "Better than whom?" "Better at what?" 
"Compared to whom, what?" 
c. Recovers Comparative Deletion.         'T 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
In examining the Meta Model, you probably noticed that all ten 
categories also occur in the Milton Model (Chapter 4). Both models 
summarize language patterns that delete, distort and generalize 
information. The two models have exactly opposite purposes. 
As  a Hypnotherapist, you  can  use  the Meta  Model to  get  your 
client to supply specific details they have omitted. The omissions 
may be unintentional, but commonly involve details that the client 
is not comfortable acknowledging. These details will show you 
why the client is there for help. 
The purpose of  the Milton Model is for the Hypnotherapist to omit 
details and speak with deliberate vagueness that will engage the 
interest of  the client's  Unconscious Mind and allow it to supply 
withheld or forgotten details from the client's experience. 
There is a further contrast between the two models that is a key to 
success in  hypnotism. As  we  discussed in Chapter  3,  the client 
may come to you in a trance of  their own, which does not 'include' 
you. Questions from the Meta Model focus the client's attention on 
details; this concentration on details will draw them out of  trance. 
Once you have obtained  the personal history,  you  can then use 
Milton Model language patterns to lead the client into a new trance 
built on rapport with you, the Hypnotherapist. It is in this trance 
that you and the client will accomplish your work. 
Chapter 7 
Pre-Talk and 
Suggestibility Tests 
Pre-Talk and  Suggestibility Tests 
The success of  a hypnosis session often rests on the effectiveness 
of  the Pre-talk, the conversation you have with the client before 
actually inducing trance. You and the client will get the best results 
from the session if  the client feels comfortable about the process of 
hypnosis, excited about its potential benefits, and convinced that 
it will work. 
Addressing Misconceptions 
During the Pre-talk, you can allay any fears or misconceptions the 
client may have about hypnosis. The most common misconception 
is that the client expects to be 'out'  to the point where they will 
have no memory of  the experience. That does not happen unless 
you give a specific suggestion to forget. 
A light trance will likely feel no different from relaxation. Since 
trance is a normal, natural state, clients will have a feeling of  famil- 
iarity no  matter how  deep in  trance  they  go.  Tell  your  clients, 
"Don't  expect  to  'feel'   hypnotized.  Trance  is  not  about  being 
zonked out. It's a normal, natural state. But do expect to feel very 
relaxed." It is sometimes useful to point out common examples of 
trance from the client's  everyday experience, such as the driving 
trance. 
A more serious concern for some clients is based on the miscon- 
ception  that  somehow  the  client  is  giving  over  control  to  the 
Hypnotherapist. Hypnosis is not power over another person, but 
rather a complex interaction between Hypnotherapist and client. It 
is a cooperative act. As you did the Utilization Exercise in the pre- 
vious chapter, you probably noticed that most of  the exercise was 
a process of  becoming synchronized with your partner. Whether 
or not you were aware of  it, the two of  you were sending waves of 
energy  toward  each  other,  synchronizing and  coming  together, 
like a dance. Think of  hypnosis as two people cooperating toward 
a mutual end, which is to establish better communication with the 
Unconscious Mind. 
Make  sure  your  clients understand that  they  are  in  control: all 
hypnosis is self-hypnosis. This is an important concept for you- 
and your client
-to understand. Hypnosis is something that the 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
client will do with himself, for himself. If  a client says, "You  can't 
hypnotize me!" he is right. He is the only person who can hypno- 
tize himself. He is the only one who moves himself  into trance. 
You  as Hypnotherapist are a facilitator or guide. Since all hypno- 
sis is self-hypnosis, the client is always in control. 
Clients accept only the suggestions that are consistent with their 
values and beliefs. A client cannot be made to do something in 
hypnosis that they would not normally do. And a client will not 
follow a post-hypnotic suggestion to do something in conflict with 
their values and beliefs. 
In the Pre-talk, I often tell a client, "During hypnosis, you need to 
know that you are in control. If  I ask you to stand up,  you will 
probably do it. But if  I told you to go rob a bank, you would not 
do that.. . unless that was your mode of  operation in the waking 
state." If  the control issue has been very much on the client's mind, 
I say "At  every moment during hypnosis, you're  in control. In 
fact, you will notice when we reach the deeper stages of  hypnosis, 
they are set up so at any given moment you can say 'No,  I don't 
want to do that.'" 
Another occasional concern is that of  the client who asks, "What 
happens if  I get stuck in trance?" My  response is,  "Pray for it!" 
People in Zen monasteries meditate for  years,  pursuing deeper 
and longer trances until they have a moment of  enlightenment and 
become 'The  Buddha.' 
Actually a client you assist into trance will not get stuck; you can 
readily lead them out at any time. In fact, if  the client stays con- 
scious during trance, he can bring himself out. 
I  can  easily  put  myself  into  deep  trance ... and  sometimes fall 
asleep. When this happens, I have a wonderful deep sleep and 
wake up at the end of  it. You can do deep trance with yourself. You 
can either set an alarm to ensure against overtrancing, or choose to 
just fall asleep and have a nice nap. Whatever way you choose to 
go into a deep trance of  self-hypnosis is the perfect way for you. 
Pre-Talk and  Suggestibility Tests 
Helping the Client Understand Trance and its Benefits 
The  more  your  client  understands about  the  trance  state,  the 
better they can play their role in the cooperative interaction that 
helps them achieve trance. Once you have observed the level of 
their  curiosity and  interest, it  may  be  useful to briefly  explain 
hypnosis in terms of  the Mind/Body connection and the healing 
possibilities that are made possible by opening up communication 
with the Unconscious Mind. The client can play their role best if 
they  understand that  rapport with you  will 'open  the  door'  to 
rapport with their own Unconscious Mind. 
Critical to success in therapy are the client's confidence and trust 
in the Hypnotherapist. You can establish trust best by asking ques- 
tions to get a clear understanding of  what the client wants to gain 
through your guidance. Questions about the client's  intent will 
show  your  support  more  clearly  than  any  statements you  can 
make. 
Suggestibility Tests 
When  the client is comfortable, even excited, about  the idea  of 
experiencing trance, there is one more very useful step before you 
induce trance: suggestibility tests. Keep in mind that everyone is 
suggestible to some degree. 
The main purpose of  suggestibility tests is to convince a client that 
they are suggestible. The client needs to know clearly that they are 
indeed suggestible and can respond to hypnosis. Before I begin a 
suggestibility test, I usually say, "You  know, my mother was told 
by her mother, 'Do  not be suggestible!' In fact many people in pre- 
vious generations thought that being suggestible was not good. 
But if  you want to attain the healthiest state, and if  you want to 
have good communication with your Unconscious Mind, then you 
need to learn how to let your Mind give suggestions to your body. 
Thus it is very useful to be suggestible. If  you get good at being 
suggestible,  you  will  be  able,  at  will,  to  tell  your  Unconscious 
Mind to do anything you want.. . and it will do it for you." 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
Suggestibility Test Exercises for Two People 
Here are three suggestibility tests for you to try out now with a 
partner, and to use later as needed for convincing a client of  their 
own suggestibility. 
First is the Dictionary and Balloon Test. 
Dictionary and  Balloon Test 
Find  a place where you and your partner have room to 
move around. The Hypnotherapist says to the client, 
"Hold  both  of  your arms stretched out  in front  of  you, 
with the palms of  your hands down, at shoulder height. 
Close your eyes. Now turn your right hand over so it is 
facing palm up. 
"Now,  I'd  like  you  to  imagine  a  heavy  book
-maybe 
Webster's Unabridged  Dictionary
-in your right hand. 
Imagine it is so heavy that it's  pulling your whole right 
arm down.. . down.. .  DOWN. Now imagine tied  to your 
left wrist a big blue balloon, filled with lots of  helium, lift- 
ing ...  lifting ...  LIFTING ...  your  left  hand  upward ... 
upward. .. UPWARD. A big blue balloon, lifting your left 
hand  upward,  upward.. . And  a heavy dictionary getting 
heavier and HEAVIER.. .. And a big blue balloon lifting, 
lifting, and LIFTING.. . . And the dictionary getting heavier 
and HEAVIER.. . . (Continue as needed.) Now,  open your 
eyes, and look at your hands! 
"If  your  arms  moved  from being  parallel,  then you  are 
suggestible, and your Body will listen to suggestions from 
your Mind. Whatever results you achieved, please consid- 
er this question: 'What  do you think the total effect of  all 
the suggestions your Mind gives your Body has been over 
the last 30 years?' This exercise lasts from 10 to 30 seconds. 
Over a 30-year time frame, what is the net effect of  all the 
suggestions you are giving yourself unconsciously?" 
Pre-Talk and  Suggestibility Tests 
Our second suggestibility test is  the  Finger  Vice  Test. You  and 
your partner can do this sitting down. 
Finger Vice Test 
The Hypnotherapist says to the client, "Clasp your hands 
together in front of  you with fingers interlocked, and raise 
your two forefingers straight upward. Move your forefin- 
gers  an  inch  apart  and  freeze  them  in  that  position, 
making sure to clasp your hands nice and tight with your 
other fingers. 
"Now I want you to imagine a little vice or clamp around 
your forefingers. I'm  going to  turn the little lever and I 
want  you  to  notice  what  happens  as  the  vice  starts  to 
close." (Make a turning motion with your hand.) "Look 
how your fingers are starting to move together." Continue 
this way until the client's  forefingers are pressed against 
each other. 
You  can also repeat the test without actually making the 
turning motion. The Hypnotherapist says, "Pull your fore- 
fingers apart and imagine the vice again. Squeezing your 
hands nice and tight and trying to hold your forefingers 
apart, imagine the little lever on the vice turning and turn- 
ing and bringing your forefingers together. Look how your 
forefingers are coming together." 
What is fun about this is that the client gets to see a second-by-sec- 
ond demonstration of  the effect of  their imagination on their fingers. 
You may occasionally have a client who will 'mismatch'. Their fin- 
gers will stay apart even as they imagine the vice. A Mismatcher is 
someone who habitually contradicts statements and suggestions. 
If  you say, "It's a great day," they will reply, "No, it's awful." If  you 
say, "This is a terrible restaurant," they will say, "It's  not so bad." 
Mismatchers are easy to deal with. You  can  tell them to do the 
opposite of  what you really want them to do. The Finger Vice Test 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
is a good way to find out if  your client is a Mismatcher. If  their 
fingers stay apart or go further apart as you have them imagine 
the clamp, change your approach. You  can say, "Even though the 
vice is closing, don't let your fingers move toward each other yet." 
If   you   give  a  Mismatcher  properly  contrary  cues,   their 
Unconscious Mind will at some point move the fingers together. 
When you are later inducing trance, you can say, "Don't  go into a 
trance yet. Don't fall deeply asleep. Don't  accept these suggestions 
totally and completely as you listen carefully to the sound of  my 
voice." 
Remember that the purpose of  suggestibility tests is to convince 
the client that they can be suggestible and go into hypnosis. There 
is no need to convince you, because you already know that every- 
one is suggestible to some degree. 
Our third suggestibility test is the Postural Sway. 
I The Postural Sway 
Find a place where the client can stand in an upright 'mil- 
itary'  position.  The  Hypnotherapist says  to  the  client, 
"Close your eyes and turn your face up toward the ceil- 
ing, with your eyes closed. Imagine that you are swaying 
back and forth. Safely  of  course, back  and forth ... back 
and forth. .. back and forth. Notice that you are actually 
beginning  to  sway, safely  of  course.  Your  Unconscious 
Mind will always catch you.. . back and forth.. . (If you are 
not  swaying, it  may  be  because  your  face  isn't  turned 
fully up toward the ceiling) . . . back and forth. Now come 
on back and open your eyes." 
Suggestibility Tests as Convincers 
These three simple, standard suggestibility tests are designed to 
allow a client who has never been in trance before to experience 
their  own  suggestibility.  They  act  as  convincers.  I  recommend 
doing at least one of  these tests before you hypnotize the client the 
first time. 
Pre-Talk and  Suggestibility Tests 
I usually do all three, saying, "You  may be better at one than the 
others. We are using different muscle groups and different parts of 
the body." In the Dictionary and Balloon Test, we use the full arm 
and shoulder muscle group. In the Finger Vice,  we use the hands. 
In  the Postural Sway, we  use  the legs.  Different muscle groups 
may be suggestible at different levels for a person, so I do all three 
tests to give the client an opportunity to see which one they do 
best. This gives me information about which muscle group is most 
suggestible. 
Suggestibility tests  are  not  particularly  Ericksonian; they  come 
from standard hypnotherapy. We  find that almost everyone will 
respond to at least one of  the tests. Before doing the tests, you need 
to  tell the client, "The  reason it's  good to be suggestible is that 
you'll  be able to have your Mind make suggestions to your Body 
at  will,  and  you'll  be  able  to  heal  anything." If  you  have  this 
discussion first,  you  will  have a  very high success rate in sug- 
gestibility tests and the hypnosis that follows. 
Some people walk into a Hypnotherapy session determined to say 
"I never felt hypnotized when they leave. In other cases, because 
the hypnotic state is  so  natural, less skeptical  people  may  say 
afterwards, "I don't think I was hypnotized. I just felt relaxed and 
comfortable." With clients of  both types, suggestibility tests act as 
powerful pre-trance convincers. 
If  for some reason the suggestibility tests do not work, this does 
not mean that the client will not go into trance. They may tell you 
that they are not hypnotized, that they feel nothing different from 
normal. Neither the client, nor you, may have any idea that they 
are in trance, and the next moment their arm may be suspended in 
mid-air. 
Students often ask  if  there is any relationship between the sug- 
gestibility tests and the depth of  hypnosis a person is able to reach. 
I avoid  predicting  depth of  trance from  the  suggestibility tests 
because  my  pre-judgment might  keep  the client  from  going as 
deep as they might. I use the suggestibility tests solely as a means 
of  convincing the client that they are hypnotizable. 
Chapter 8 
Stages of Hypnosis 
Stages of  Hypnosis 
Recognizing Levels of Trance 
To ensure that the client has the most successful hypnotic experi- 
ence, it is important that you continually recognize what level of 
hypnosis the client has reached. Recognizing levels will enable 
you to utilize what is happening, and to anticipate and head off 
possible reactions of  distress. 
Early in my practice, I was doing a Parts Integration (an NLP tech- 
nique  used  to  resolve  Conscious/Unconscious conflicts) with  a 
client who happened to be in a profoundly deep trance. As  my 
client  was  having  a  very  deep  discussion  with  parts  of   her 
Unconscious,  she found  she was almost unable to  move. I had 
missed  the  physiological signs of  her shift into a deeper trance 
level. If  I had noticed the level, I could have applied utilization and 
said, "You  may notice that you are in a deep, deep trance, and do 
not want to move. This will  probably  amuse and  delight you." 
Instead the client noticed on her own that she could not move, and 
this greatly distressed her. 
Noticing signs of  the level of  trance will enable you to guide the 
client smoothly to a satisfying outcome. Not recognizing the level 
of  trance could result in the client thinking in panic, "Oh no, I am 
totally relaxed and I can't  move. What happens if  I never become 
unrelaxed?" There  is  no  need  for  them  to  feel  this  distress in 
trance. 
Table: Stages of  Hypnosis 
(adapted from LeCron, Hypnotism Today, 1964) 
The best indicator of  the level of  trance a client has reached  is 
the hypnotic phenomena they have produced at your suggestion. 
The table on the next page is a useful guide to stages of  hypnosis 
and  the  phenomena you  can  usually  expect  to  induce at  those 
stages. You  will find a detailed discussion in the text that follows 
the table. 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
tages of   Hypnosis 
Adapted from LeCron, 1964) 
Lethargy 
Relaxation 
Eye Catalepsy 
:atalepsy of  Isolated Muscle Groups (Arm Catalepsy) 
Heavy or Floating Feelings 
Catalepsy of  Complete Muscle Groups 
(Full Body Catalepsy) 
Hypnotic Rapport 
Medium 
Smell and Taste Changes 
Number Block 
Amnesia 
Glove Anesthesia 
Analgesia (No Pain) 
Automatic Movement 
Light 
20% 
( 
Positive Hallucinations - Visual and Auditory 
I 
I 
Bizarre Post-Hypnotic Suggestions 
I 
Anesthesia (No Feelings) 
Negative Hallucinations 
Comatose State 
I 
Stages of  Hypnosis 
There are three excellent ways to understand  the continuum of 
trance levels: 
1.       seeing the six stages of  hypnosis demonstrated, 
2.        experiencing the stages yourself, 
3.         taking a client through the stages. 
When you begin to induce trance, the client will typically start at 
Stage 1 of  hypnosis, experiencing lethargy, then some relaxation. 
The first catalepsy that you induce will usually be in the eyelids. 
This is because the muscles controlling the eyelids form one of  the 
smallest muscle groups in the body and are easily relaxed. Eyelid 
catalepsy occurs when the client's  eyes are so relaxed  that  they 
cannot open them; they will seem to be stuck shut. Eyelid catalep- 
sy is an excellent convincer to prepare the client for deeper stages 
of  hypnosis. 
As the client moves into Stage 2 of  hypnosis, you can elicit catalep- 
sy of  isolated muscle groups, such as arm catalepsy. Also typical 
are heavy or floating feelings. This is still considered light trance. 
At the deep end of  Stage 2,  you can induce catalepsy of  complete 
muscle  groups,  such  as  those  in  the  legs,  or  even  full  body 
catalepsy. Complete muscle group catalepsy is the beginning of 
medium trance. 
In Stage 3,  the client will exhibit a specific level of  rapport, called 
hypnotic rapport, defined as the state in which the client  hears  and 
sees only the Hypnotherapist. In this stage, you can induce dramatic 
smell and taste  changes. You  can hold fresh cookies under  the 
client's nose and tell them that it's  old cabbage, and they will say 
"Yuck." Or hold some ammonia under their nose and say it's fresh 
cookies, and they will say "Mmmmm." You can also elicit number 
block, causing a number to disappear for  a client. You  can say 
"The number four does not exist," and when you ask the client to 
count something, they  will count, "One ... two ... three ... five ... 
six ...." The  number  simply  will  not  exist  in  their  repertoire  of 
numbers. (Be sure to put it back later.) 
As the client moves to deeper levels of  medium trance, they will 
be at Stage 4. At this level, you can produce amnesia, suggesting 
that  the client forget portions of what  happens  in  the trance .... 
This is very useful for post-hypnotic suggestions to help the client 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
achieve  desired  changes  without  'interference'   from  their 
Conscious Mind. You  can also induce glove anesthesia, in which 
the hand becomes numb, as if  you had put an anesthetic glove on 
it ... or  reduce sensations  in  some  other  part  of  the  body. Just 
beyond glove anesthesia is analgesia, the absence of  sensation of 
pain.  When  you  have  induced  analgesia,  the  client  can  have 
ambiguous sensations, but no specific pain sensation. They  will 
feel your touch, but not the pain of  a needle jab. 
At the deepest level of  Stage 4 is automatic movement. The easiest 
automatic movement to initiate is with the client's hands. Simply 
start their hands rotating around each other in front of  them, and 
they will automatically continue to rotate until you tell the client 
to stop. (Motor coordination can be imprecise during trance; you 
may  need  to  guide the hands gently into  the beginning of  the 
movement.) 
The client will begin to experience deep trance at the beginning of 
Stage 5. Common at this stage is positive hallucination,  that is, 
seeing or hearing something that is not  there. If  you hold your 
empty  hand  in  front  of  the  client  and  tell  them  that  you  are 
holding a tennis ball, they will be able to tell you the color of  the 
ball and  the number that appears on it. (The opposite, negative 
hallucination, is  not  seeing  or  hearing something  that  is  there. 
Negative hallucination comes into play in Stage 6). 
A Stage 5 phenomenon familiar  from stage hypnosis is bizarre 
post-hypnotic suggestion, which will cause the client to do some- 
thing outlandish after they are out of  trance, as long as it does not 
conflict  with  their  values or  beliefs. Andr6 
delightful  story  about  post-hypnotic 
said to a client in trance, "George, when you wake up, you will feel 
an irresistible urge to give me a dollar." George woke up and felt 
the urge; but he did not give Weizenhoffer the dollar. Weizenhoffer 
got a phone call the next morning at 2 a.m. from George, who said, 
"Darn it, Andrk, I'm coming over to your house right now to give 
you two dollars." Weizenhoffer asked him, "Why didn't you give 
me a dollar at the time?" George said, "When I came out of  the 
trance, I had this irresistible urge to give you a dollar. I knew that 
I would not have this urge normally so I knew you  must have 
given me  a post-hypnotic suggestion. I said  to  myself, 'I'm   not 
Stages of  Hypnosis 
going to do it!'  But I've been obsessing about it all night, so I'm 
coming over right now!" 
When you give a post-hypnotic suggestion intended only for the 
time of the session, be sure to remove the suggestion before the 
client leaves! 
At Stage 6 the client is reaching the deepest trance levels. At this 
stage,  you  can  induce anesthesia,  which  would  allow  surgery 
without  a  chemical  anesthetic  or  drilling  of   teeth  without 
Novocaine. (If you induce anesthesia, I am not suggesting that you 
attempt the surgery or dentistry.) This is the level of  trance that Dr 
James Esdaile  induced  by  mesmerism  to  prepare  patients  for 
surgery in  India  in  the 1800s. Taking  the client  to Stage 6 may 
require quite some time. They may need to go in and out of  trance 
for an extended period in the process of  deepening the hypnosis to 
this level. 
At Stage 6,  you can induce negative hallucination, or not seeing or 
hearing something that is there. If  you are in perfect rapport, you 
can say to the client, "You  only see me, you do not see or hear any- 
one else here." And if  someone else were to stand in front of  the 
client and talk, they would not have any awareness of  that person. 
Progressing deeper into Stage 6, the client will enter the comatose 
state.  Dave  Elman,  whom  we  will  be  studying,  calls  this  the 
Esdaile state. In this state, the client is sleeping deeply yet still in 
hypnotic rapport with the Hypnotherapist. 
At the deepest of  level of  Stage 6,  somnambulism, or sleepwalk- 
ing, can occur. In the somnambulistic state the client can rise and 
move about, producing behavior that looks almost as though they 
were awake. You  would have to observe their behavior closely to 
notice that they were not quite moving in the way an unhypno- 
tized person would move. 
In later chapters, we will discuss ways of  inducing the hypnotic 
phenomena that are common to the six stages. To practise hypno- 
sis skilfully,  you need to memorize the stages and the phenomena, 
so that recognizing them becomes second nature. 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
Applicability of the Stages of  Hypnosis 
The sequence of  phenomena in the six stages is based on LeCron's 
and other hypnotists' research and experience with large numbers 
of  clients. The LeCron scale is accepted as one of  the major guides 
in hypnosis. This sequence will hold true for many though not all, 
hypnotic subjects. Some clients will not experience all of  the phe- 
nomena,  and some may experience them in different order. For 
example,  your  client  might  achieve  arm  catalepsy  not  in  light 
trance, but later, in medium or deep trance. 
The percentages in the table show approximately what proportion 
of  people  can  achieve each  of  the levels of  trance  in  an  early 
session without further conditioning. Of  the people who come to 
see you, it is likely that 20% will initially achieve only light trance, 
60% will  achieve  medium  trance,  and  the  remaining 20% will 
achieve deep trance. 
Both  Erickson  and  Dave  Elman  disputed  these  percentages. 
Erickson said  he  didn't  know  anybody  who  couldn't  go into a 
deep trance,  though some people took a long time to achieve it. 
His best subject actualized deep trance phenomena only after 300 
repeated inductions. Erickson's  point of  view was that, "Trance is 
about learning how to go into trance." 
LeCron's  percentages referred specifically to people without pre- 
vious practice at achieving trance. In my experience, anyone can 
eventually  learn  how  to  achieve  deep  trance,  which  assists  a 
person in healing and making changes at the unconscious level. 
You will improve your effectiveness as a Hypnotherapist by devel- 
oping your own ability to experience trance at all three 1evels. You 
can practise by being a hypnotic subject  or doing self-hypnosis. 
The Elman techniques (Chapter 16) are quite effective for reaching 
deep trance by self-hypnosis. 
We are now ready to examine the most effective methods for lead- 
ing a client into hypnosis. We  will start with Milton  Erickson's 
methods, in recognition of  Erickson's pioneering work in the field, 
and because his methods are so often the most comfortable way to 
introduce a new client to trance. 
Chapter 9 
Ericksonian Methods 
Ericksonian Methods 
The Usefulness of Erickson's Techniques 
Milton Erickson's  greatest contribution  to  the field  of  hypnosis 
was his development of  indirect, permissive techniques. He used 
hypnosis early in his practice of  psychiatry, employing a classic 
direct,  authoritarian approach  from 1920  to 1940.  Erickson  had 
unusually sharp sensory acuity, which he developed even further 
with practice. Over the years, he combined his ability to sense the 
slightest physical signs with his intuitive counselling and story- 
telling skills, shifting gradually to a far more indirect approach. By 
the time of  his death in 1980,  he was doing almost all hypnosis 
indirectly. He sometimes did not even mention the word 'hypno- 
sis';  he might simply sit down and  tell the patient some stories. 
The  patient  might leave wondering what had changed,  only  to 
find later that their problem had resolved itself. 
Erickson believed that everyone is capable of  achieving trance. He 
frequently said that trance is about learning how to go into trance. 
During the course of  his life he had a great deal of  practice-prac- 
tising hypnosis daily from 1920 to 1980
-and thus developed great 
expertise in inducing trance indirectly. 
We  don't have, or need, 60 years! Because Erickson left such clear 
teachings, we can study his techniques and model our methods on 
his. 
Erickson's  techniques are  particularly  effective  for  hypnotizing 
people who do not like to be told  what to do,  people who have 
hesitations about the process, and  people who are being hypno- 
tized for the first time. There are, of  course, people who have spent 
most of  their lives following orders. They may respond best to a 
direct,  authoritarian  approach.  You  will  need  to  observe  the 
client's responses before and during trance induction, and choose 
the approach that seems best suited. If  you have any doubts about 
which  approach to  take,  Erickson's  techniques are  an  excellent 
way to start. If  you find  yourself  using an approach that is not 
working, by all means switch to another type of  induction. 
You  will  sometimes encounter  clients who are definitely not  as 
suggestible as others. Erickson's  methods may be the most effec- 
tive  way  to  reach  them,  following  a  suitable  pre-talk. You  can 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
begin by telling them, "Trance is about learning how to go into 
trance.. . don't  expect to feel hypnotized." Use the suggestibility 
tests as convincers. Then begin the induction, using indirect, per- 
missive techniques. You will achieve a high rate of  success. 
Erickson's methods allow a client to feel wonderfully comfortable 
with the process of  hypnosis. Erickson said  that one of  his best 
subjects became a good subject after 300 inductions. It is hard to 
imagine that  he could  have  gotten  the client  to  sit  still for  300 
inductions if  he had not been using an approach that was com- 
fortable and easy to relate to. 
Not only is Erickson's approach comfortable for the client, it is also 
the  easiest  way  for  a  new  Hypnotherapist  to  begin  inducing 
trance. When a new student learns a permissive approach to hyp- 
nosis before learning other techniques, they will install skills and 
beliefs that will increase their success rate with clients later in their 
career. 
Erickson's  Utilization Approach 
Erickson's  approach  is  a  utilization  approach,  which  has  three 
stages. 
The  first stage is Preparation, which  we  discussed in  the 
chapters  on  personal  history,  pre-talk and  suggestibility 
tests. 
The second stage is Trance  Work,  which will be our main 
focus in this chapter. 
The third stage is  joint  Evaluation  of   Results  by the client 
and the Hypnotherapist, which locks in convincers for the 
client and enables deep integration of  changes. 
Steps in Trance Work 
Essential to Trance Work is fixation of  the client's attention. We 
have discussed how hypnotists from the time of  James Braid had 
the client focus on an object positioned to make the eyes fixate in 
an  upward  stare.  In  contrast,  Erickson  achieved  hypnosis  by 
utilizing the client's beliefs and behavior to focus their attention on 
Ericksonian  Methods 
inner realities. Using Milton Model patterns from Chapter 4,  you 
too  can  engage  the  client's  Unconscious Mind  and  focus  their 
attention on inner realities. 
The  client comes to  the Hypnotherapist with a fully developed 
'model of  the world,' which contains their values, their beliefs, and 
their concepts of  how things work in the world. The client stores 
this model of  the world in their Unconscious Mind. If  the strongly 
held values and beliefs in their model conflict with their conscious 
desires,  the client's  unconscious model  of  the  world  will block 
their attainment of  those desires. Hypnosis can unseat deeply held 
success-blocking beliefs that the client has about himself  and his 
environment. 
Erickson recognized that in order to help the client create changes, 
he first needed to loosen the client's model of  the world, so that 
the client's Unconscious Mind would be open to changes in beliefs 
and values. While the client was in trance, Erickson used distraction, 
shock, surprise, doubt, confusion and any other process that chal- 
lenged their model of  the world. Erickson's  purpose was to lead 
the  client  into  an  unconscious  search.  He  used  ambiguities, 
implications, questions, puns, and other indirect forms of  sugges- 
tion  to  activate that unconscious search. The  client would  then 
move through an unconscious process, activating new associations 
and mental mechanisms. The client's hypnotic responses, often in 
the form of  deep trance phenomena, would show Erickson  that 
major change had occurred. 
When you are obtaining your client's Personal History, your use of 
the Meta Model will begin loosening their model of  the world by 
focusing their conscious attention on details that they have been 
deleting. 
Here are specific questions to loosen the client's  model and pre- 
pare them to move to new beliefs: 
What specificallv do vou want? 
0 
Where are you now? 
What  will you see,  hear and feel when you have 
what you want? 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
How will you know when you have it? 
* 
hat resources do you  need  vvnat  resources do 
have now, and what do you need to get your 
ome?  Have  you  ever  had  this  or  done  this 
fore? Do you know anyone who has? 
the result that you want ecological? (That is, will 
ts on you and the peo- 
purpose do you want 
se if  you have it? 
As  you  lead  the  client  into  trance,  you  can  use  Milton  Model 
language to engage their Unconscious Mind in more profoundly 
loosening the model and becoming open to major change. 
Erickson's Hypnotic Patterns of  Indirect Suggestion 
Erickson left us with a rich variety of  hypnotic patterns to use in 
Trance Work. While you are developing your personal style, you 
can use this section as a reference to review these patterns. 
Indirect suggestions. The  first major  difference between 
Ericksonian hypnosis and other forms of  hypnosis is that 
Ericksonian  hypnosis  is  generally  indirect  rather  than 
direct. A direct suggestion appeals to the Conscious Mind 
and  invites evaluation. When you say, "Please  close  th 
window,"  the  listener's  conscious  reaction  is  to  choose 
asked. 
between agreeing and  disagreeing to  do what you  have 
An  indirect  suggestion  resonates  with  the  Unconscious 
Mind  and  is  less likely  to  trigger evaluation. When  you 
say, "I'm  wondering if  you can close the window," the lis- 
tener's  unconscious reaction is to hear  your 'embedded' 
suggestion and follow it. Of  course, a teenager might say, 
Ericksonian Methods 
"Yes," and walk away. Typically, however, "I'm wondering 
if  you can close the window," will get the desired response. 
2.          Embedded  commands.  Erickson  often  used  embedded 
commands,  or  commands  'hidden'   within  longer  sen- 
tences. If  he said, "You  don't  need to go into trance right 
now," the client's  conscious mind would be distracted by 
the surface sentence about not needing to go into trance, 
while their Unconscious Mind would hear and respond to 
the embedded command, "Go into trance right now." 
Sometimes Erickson  would combine an embedded com- 
mand with punctuation ambiguity (as described earlier in 
the Milton Model) and say, "I want you to tell me only the 
things  you  want  to  tell  me  everything." The  embedded 
command, "You  want to tell me everything," would tend 
to bypass the Conscious Mind. 
3.         Embedded descriptions. These are ways of  thinking that 
work  like embedded commands. If  you  are talking  to a 
client about trance, you might say, "You may think that it's 
not easy to go into a trance. You may not find that trance is 
delightfully relaxing. Because you've  never been in trance 
before, you don't  know what to expect. In fact, you may 
not expect to feel that calming. relaxing sensation that you 
are  about  to  feel." As  the client  is  conscious of  hearing 
things that they may not do, their Unconscious Mind will 
be hearing and responding to your embedded commands 
and descriptions. 
There is no standard way to 'voice'  embedded commands. 
In  class,  I often pause and  change to a  gravelly tone of 
voice to emphasize embedded commands, so that students 
can notice them easily. You  may find it effective to pause 
and shift to a slightly deeper tonality, which might be very 
attractive to the client's  Unconscious Mind. Try embedded 
commands with and without pauses just before them, with 
and without a change in tonality. Develop your own style 
of  speaking embedded commands in  any  way  that  pro- 
duces results. 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
4.           Yes  Sets. Erickson  used  Yes  Sets  extensively  to  get  the 
agreement of the client's  Unconscious Mind. A Yes Set is a 
series of  statements or questions that has the client saying 
or  thinking,  "Yes,  yes,  yes,  yes,  yes,"  so  that  when  the 
Hypnotist adds a crucial instruction or question, the client 
again responds, "Yes." 
and while you are doing that,       are  thinking 
about certain things. Because      you are interested in many 
things that have led you to study this subject, aren't you? 
That means that you will be able to learn hypnosis easily. 
Notice  how  reading that  paragraph felt  in your  body. I 
drew   four   automatic,   effortless   Yeses   from   your 
Unconscious Mind,  so  that  my  embedded  command  to 
learn  hypnosis  easily  would  glide  smoothly  into  your 
Unconscious and get still another yes. 
5.          Truisms about sensations. You can use a Yes Set of  truisms 
about sensations to lead to a statement of  what the client is 
feeling, and the client is likely to feel just what you have 
suggested. Here are some Ericksonian truisms: "Most peo- 
ple enjoy the refreshing coolness of  a light breeze." "Many 
people  find  the  sound  of  water  very  relaxing." "Some 
people blush easily when they  recognize certain feelings 
about themselves." These truisms could be part of  a Yes Set 
leading up to, "I wonder if  you will feel absolutely com- 
fortable and at peace recognizing your feelings about.. .. 
As preparation for the next paragraph, I want you to notice 
something about your hands. Just for fun, put your hands 
on your lap. I want you to really feel your hands, and notice 
that  one  of   your  hands  feels  different  from  the  other, 
doesn't it? Really notice this, one of  your hands definitely 
feels different from the other.. . . It does. Do you know why 
one of  your hands feels different from the other? Because i t  
is a  different  hand. It is true. Look at your right hand, and 
look at your left hand. 
Ericksonian Methods 
Now if  I say to the client, "In a moment, one of  your hands 
is going to feel different from the other," the client is going 
to think in astonishment, "That's  right.. . it does!" (I am not 
going to point out to the client that it is a different hand.) 
Once this convincer has entered the client's  Unconscious 
Mind, I can add, "Most people can experience one hand as 
being  lighter  than  the  other,"  and  my  truism  about 
sensation is a powerful suggestion paving the way to arm 
levitation and arm catalepsy. 
6.         Truisms utilizing time. Saying that something is about to 
happen (leaving the timing up to the client) is suggestive in 
itself  and  acts  as  a  convincer  when  the  thing  happens. 
Everyone blinks fairly often. You  can say to the client, "In 
a moment you're  going to blink." When the client blinks, 
say,  "That's  right." The  client's  Unconscious  Mind  will 
think, "Interesting,  they said  I was going to blink, and I 
blinked. So I really did accept the suggestion." This makes 
the Unconscious Mind  more amenable to future sugges- 
tions. 
Truisms  utilizing  time  fit  smoothly  into  double  binds 
(described earlier in Chapter Four on the Milton Model), as 
in "Sooner or later, your eyes are going to close," or "Your 
headache can leave now.. . or as soon as your system is 
ready for it to leave." 
7.          Not knowing, not doing. Erickson often talked about not 
knowing or not doing: "You don't  have to talk or move or 
make any sort of  an effort. You  don't  even have to hold 
your eyes open. People can sleep and not know they are 
sleeping. They can dream and  not  remember the dream. 
You  just do not know when the eyelids will close all by 
themselves. And you may not know just which hand will 
lift  first." This  paradoxical  type  of   suggestion  can  be 
intriguing to the Unconscious Mind. You  can suggest that 
it is fine for the client not to know or do something, and at 
the same time expand the Unconscious Mind's  awareness 
of  that something. 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
Whenever a client said, "I  don't  know," Erickson  would 
say, "That's  right, you don't know." He would validate the 
client's not knowing and not doing. In a sense, this is very 
Shamanistic. 
8.         Open-ended  suggestions.  Erickson  used  open-ended 
suggestions to invite the client's  Unconscious Mind to sup- 
ply  all  the  details from  the  client's  own experience. He 
might say: "We  all have potential we are unaware of, and 
we usually don't know how it will be expressed." Or "You 
may not be aware of  how much you are learning, and you 
are learning a  lot.  And  it  isn't  right for  me  to  tell  you, 
'Learn this,'  or 'Learn that,'  so you can learn whatever you 
want, in whatever order you wish." 
9.          Covering  all  possible  responses.  Erickson  liked  to 
describe a whole range of  possibilities, so that no matter 
what happened, the client's attention would be focused on 
a sensation or  movement in  the range he described. He 
might say, "Soon you will find a finger or a thumb moving 
a bit, perhaps by itself. It can move up or down or to the 
side. It can be slow or quick, or it may not move at all." The 
client  would  eventually  find  a  thumb  or  finger  doing 
something,  and  this  would  act  as  a  convincer.  And  no 
matter what the client did, they were right, for purposes of 
developing trance. 
This is one of  my favorites: "Tonight when you sleep you 
may dream. You  may have wild dreams.. . you may have 
exciting dreams.. . you may have mild dreams.. . you 
have boring dreams. Your  dreams may be memorable o 
they may not. In any case, let that be a sign.. . that 
know in order to have the problem disappear." 
integrating everything at the Unconscious level. So 
this time tomorrow, you will know everything you need to 
10.   Questions  to  facilitate  new  response  possibilities. 
Erickson was also fond of  using questions to focus atten- 
tion  or facilitate internal change. With  a client who had 
been hypnotized before, he would ask, "Did  you experi- 
ence the hypnotic state as basically similar to the waking 
Ericksonian Methods 
state or different from the waking state?" In response, the 
client  would  go  back  into  trance  to  compare  the  two 
possibilities. Similarly, we can induce trance just by asking, 
"Have you ever been in a trance before.. . right now?" 
Ericksonian questions can facilitate internal change with a 
very suggestive double bind, giving the illusion of  choice: 
"What  will  be  the  more  effective way  for you  to  lose 
weight? Will  it be  because you  simply forget to eat? Or 
because you have little patience with heavy meals, since 
they prevent you from doing more interesting things?" 
Compound  suggestions. Erickson  used  compound  sug- 
gestions, in which one element was readily assumable or 
already happening, and the second element would gain in 
suggestive power by being connected with the first. There 
are several types of  compound suggestions. 
The simplest compound suggestion is the Yes Set with only 
one  preparatory Yes:  "It's  such a  beautiful  day, let's  go 
swimming." 
Association  creates almost instant trance simply by the fact 
that it is natural and nearly inevitable: "With every breath 
you  take,  you  can  become  more  aware  of   the  natural 
rhythm in your body and feelings of  comfort that develop." 
Opposites  form  a compound  suggestion, especially  when 
one of  the elements is already in progress: "As one hand 
lifts, the other can press down." 
Tag  questions  and  Why nots  work well for  regaining deep 
rapport  with  your  client's  Conscious  and  Unconscious 
Mind. They help dissolve any resistance which may be in 
the way  of  deeper levels of  trance. In  addition,  they are 
perfect for Mismatchers. "And you are, aren't  you?" "You 
can try, can't  you?" "You can't stop it, can you?" "Why not 
let it happen?" 
Negative + until  suggestions  release the client from feeling 
any  pressure  to 'perform.'  "You  don't  have  to  go  into a 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
trance  until  you're  ready.  And  you  won't,   until  your 
Unconscious  is  ready."  Released  from  worries  about 
whether they are 'doing  it right,'  the client can go into a 
trance much more quickly. 
Implications or  I f . . . ,     then ... statements are also highly sug- 
gestive: "If  you sit down, then you can go into a trance." 
"Now, if  you uncross your legs and place your hands com- 
fortably on your lap, you'll be ready to enter into a trance." 
Sometimes the  ifs  and  thens  are  just  implied: "As  that 
comfort deepens, your Unconscious Mind can relax, while 
your  Conscious reviews the  nature  of  the  problem;  and 
when  a  relevant  and  interesting  thought  reaches  your 
Conscious Mind, your eyes can open as you carefully con- 
sider it." 
12.       Double binds. Erickson set up compelling double binds 
for his clients: "Would you like to enter into a trance now 
or later?" His attitude about double binds seemed to be, "I 
think  my  client  should  have  the  freedom  to  do  exactly 
what  I'm  telling  them,  in  any  way  that  they  like." The 
double bind appears to give a choice to the client. 
The  Conscious /Unconscious double bind  is  intriguingly 
truthful because, in fact, we have no way of  knowing how 
much the Unconscious knows. You  can say, "I  think your 
Unconscious knows more about that than your Conscious 
Mind does. And  if  your Unconscious Mind knows more 
about that than your conscious Mind does, then you prob- 
ably know more about it than you think you do." 
A special instance of  the double bind is double disassocia- 
tion: "You can, as a person, awaken; but you do not need to 
awaken  as  a  body.  (Pause) You  can  awaken  when  your 
body  awakens,  but  without  recognition  of   your  body. 
(Pause) Just awaken from the neck up." 
These hypnotic patterns defined Erickson's indirect, per- 
missive approach. In the next chapter, we will see many 
of   them  in  the  context  of   two  examples  of   classic 
Ericksonian inductions. 
Ericksonian Methods 
Evaluation of  Results 
The  third stage of  the  utilization approach is  joint  Evaluation  of 
Results  by  the  client  and  the  Hypnotherapist. This  might  mean 
asking the client questions that will lead you and them to perceive 
the changes that have taken place. It might be a single direct ques- 
tion: "That was a big one, wasn't  it?" The client's  acknowledgment 
of  changes will act as a powerful convincer, building confidence in 
the  process  and  allowing  deep integration of  the  changes  they 
have made. 
Here is one way to set up the client's evaluation of  changes. When 
the client comes into the office with a certain unwanted behavior, 
you  can  ask  them  to  perform  the  behavior  in  the  office.  For 
example, 
Hypnotherapis t: 
"How do you know when it is time to 
smoke?" 
Client: 
"I have a feeling." 
Hypnotherapist:          "Can you get that feeling of  wanting to 
smoke now?" 
If  after your intervention the client cannot get in touch with the 
feeling of  wanting to smoke, that result will act as a clear acknowl- 
edgment of  the change. 
By far the most powerful way for the client to acknowledge results 
is to convince the Hypnotherapist that they have changed. 
Hypnotherapist:          "I don't  think you have changed fully yet." 
Client: 
"No, I think I have." 
Hypnotherapist:          "Really?" 
Client: 
"Yes!" 
Hypnotherapist:          "Are you sure?" 
Client: 
"Yes, I am!" 
Hypnotherapis t: 
"Good. Then you are sure you've changed." 
Let the client convince you of  the change whenever possible, and 
he will become more convinced of  it himself. 
Chapter 10 
Two Ericksonian Inductions 
Two Ericksonian  Inductions 
We are ready to begin practical work in hypnosis. The best way to 
master hypnosis is to experience it as a client yourself and to prac- 
tise simple inductions first, moving to more complex and elegant 
inductions later. Obviously, such practice requires a partner. Find 
one  who shares  your  interest and  enthusiasm so  you  can  take 
turns. For learning purposes, detailed explanations follow some of 
the steps of  the inductions below. (For later quick reference, these 
inductions are duplicated in the Appendix without explanations.) 
Ericksonian Induction No. 1: Question Set Induction 
We  are going  to begin  with an  induction called  a  Question  Set, 
which will  take about 10 minutes. By  doing this induction and 
experiencing it as a subject, you will discover how to induce trance 
simply by  asking questions. When  you  assume  the Therapist's 
role, pay attention to what the client does each step of  the way. 
Each time they exhibit trance-like behavior, say, "That's right," in a 
soothing and encouraging tone of  voice. 
Have you ever been in a trance before.. . right now? 
To consider their answer, the client will have to 'try 
on'  a trance. You  have already explained trances 
like the driving trance or the elevator trance in the 
pre-talk. If  the client answers "No," ask, "Can you 
remember  the state you  were  in  just  before  you 
completely woke up this morning?" or "Can you 
remember  the  last  time  you  were  completely 
absorbed in a book or a movie?" 
Did  you  experience that state as being similar to 
the  waking  state,  or  different  from  the  waking 
state? 
You  are asking the client  to  recall  a  trance state. 
Doing this is likely to lead them into trance. 
Can you find a spot that you would like to look at 
comfortably? 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
As you continue comfortably looking at that spot 
for a while, do your eyelids want to blink? 
When they blink, say, "That's  right. " At this point or 
any other through Question 8, if  the client's eyelids 
suddenly shut firmly and heavily, you can go right 
to Question 9. 
Will those lids begin to blink one at a time.. . twice 
or three times before they close altogether? 
As soon as you see a blink, pause in the questions 
and say, "That's  right. " 
Rapidly or more slowly? 
"That's  right. " 
Will they just close, now, or will they putter all by 
themselves first? 
This is especially useful if  the client's  eyelids are 
fluttering, which is usually indicative of  the firs 
stage of  hypnosis. 
Will the eyes close more and more as you get more 
and more relaxed? 
That's  right.  Can  those  eyes  just  stay  closed  a 
you're comfortable to go deeper, just like when you 
go to sleep? 
Or  would  you  rather really  try in vain and  find 
you cannot? 
And  just  when  will  you  soon  forget  about  then 
altogether  because  you're  unconscious.. . want 
you to dream! 
Insert suggestions. 
Two  Ericksonian Inductions 
Give  your  partner-client  some  suitable  desired  sugges- 
tions,  such as,  "You  can integrate all the things you are 
learning,  and  find  it  very  easy  to  do  hypnosis.  Your 
Unconscious  Mind  can  supply to  your Conscious Mind 
whatever you  need  to  know so  you  will be  able to say 
whatever you  need  to say  in the  moment, so  that  your 
client will go deeply into trance." 
Bring  client out  of  trance:  In  a  moment,  I  am going  to 
count backwards from 10 to 1, and  I want you to awaken 
one tenth of the way with each number until you are fully 
awake. 10 ... 9... B...  etc. 
Count back  in  whatever  way  you  are  most comfortable 
with as the Hypnotherapist. 
Physiological Responses to Trance 
When you have done the induction for each other, consider what 
you  noticed while you  were  the client. You  may  have breathed 
more deeply, or your breathing may have become more shallow. 
We cannot set up specific physiological guidelines to gauge trance, 
because people go into trance states differently. Even for the same 
person, different trances can have different brain wave patterns, 
different rates of  respiration,  different galvanic skin  responses, 
and different subjective experiences. Chapter 8 described hypnot- 
ic  phenomena  which  typically correspond  to  various levels  of 
trance, but the correspondence between the phenomena and the 
levels of  trance can vary widely. 
During  trance  the  muscles  relax  in  many  different  ways. 
Sometimes the body moves into different positions. I  have had 
clients who looked as though they were about to fall off  the chair, 
but they did not. As the Hypnotherapist, you must pay attention 
to your client's  body posture and safety, especially if  they are in 
trance for a long period of  time. You can give the client suggestions 
for  bodily  safety: "You  can  relax  your  head ... straighten  your 
neck ... place  your  elbow  gently  on  the  armrest  (especially for 
eliciting ideomotor  signals  in  trance) ...  relax  your  feet  on  the 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
Two Ericksonlan lnductions 
floor.. . in an alignment that will bring you deepening comfort and 
support." 
Sometimes trance is so comfortable that the client wants to stay in 
this peaceful state as long as possible. After you have suggested 
desirable changes for the client, you can give them suggestions to 
come out of  trance. 
With this first trance induction, you and your partner have begun 
to  experience  a  powerful  process  for  healing  yourselves  and 
others. The more easily you can go into trance, the more skilfully 
you will be able to use hypnosis in assisting your clients. 
Ericksonian Induction No.2: Arm Levitation 
We  are now going to expand on the first induction by eliciting Arm 
Levitation  during the client's  trance. You  will again be inducing 
trance simply by asking questions. This time, however,  you will 
want to pay close attention to the client's  breathing. For the ques- 
tions you ask to deepen the client's relaxation, speak on  the client's 
out-breath. For the questions you ask to elicit arm levitation, speak 
on  the client's  in-breath. In this way, you will be using the client's 
own breathing to reinforce your suggestions physiologically. 
To see how this breathing reinforcement works, put your feet flat 
on the floor and  rest  your hands and fingertips lightly on your 
thighs. Take a sharp, deep, full breath. Notice how your hands feel 
like they are lifting up. 
As  before, each time the client exhibits trance-like behavior, say, 
"That's  right," in a soothing and encouraging tone of  voice. 
Out Breath 
1.    Have you ever been in a trance before. ..right now? 
Asking Questions 1 and 2 on the client's out-breath 
will suggest relaxation while her breathing action 
supports it. 
2.         Did  you experience that state as being similar to 
the  waking  state,  or  different  from  the  waking 
state? 
In Breath 
You  can feel comfortable resting your hands gen- 
tly on your thighs, can you not? (Demonstrate) 
That's  right, don't  let them touch each other. 
When you ask this and the following questions on 
the  client's  in-breath,  her  breathing will  give  a 
light lift to the arms. 
Can you let those hands rest so-oo lightly so that 
the fingertips  just touch  your thighs? 
Make sure the hands and fingertips barely touch 
the thighs. 
That's  right.  As  they  rest  there  just  so  lightly, 
have you noticed  yet how they tend to lift up a bit 
all by themselves (Hypnotherapist, take a deep in- 
breath here) with  each  breath  you  take?  Good. 
Now we will  just wait and see. 
Take several deep, full breaths. If  you are in rapport 
with your client, the sound of  your breathing will 
cause them to breathe with you. It may cause her 
arms to begin     to lift. If  this happens, move straight 
to Question 16. If  the client's arms have not begun 
to lift,  switch to speaking on her out-breaths and 
continue with Question 6. 
Out Breath 
5. 
Now, can  you find  a spot that  you would  like to 
look at comfortably? 
Hypnotherapy: A Comprehensive Guide 
Two Ericksonian Inductions 
I. 
1. 
LO. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
As you continue comfortably looking at that spot 
for a while, do your eyelids want to blink? 
Will those lids begin to blink one at a time.. . twice 
or three times before they close altogether? 
Rapidly or more slowly? 
Will they just close, now, or will they flutter all by 
themselves first? 
Will the eyes close more and more as you get more 
and more relaxed? 
That's  right.  Can  those  eyes  just  stay  closed  as 
you're comfortable to go deeper, just like when you 
go to sleep? 
Can your comfort go more and more deeply, inside, 
so  that  you'd  rather  not  even  try  to  open  your 
eyes? 
Or  would  you  rather  really  try in vain and  find 
you cannot? 
And  just  when  will  you  soon  forget  about them 
altogether because your unconscious.. . wants you 
to dream!.. . of lifting, lifting, lifting. 
In Breath 
16.        Have you noticed your hands lifting, lifting, lifting 
even more lightly, even more easily, and  by them- 
selves ... as the rest of  your body relaxes more and 
more? 
With  Question  16,  begin  again  speaking  on  tht 
client's  in-breaths. See  the  example  that  follow! 
these questions to get the breathing exactly right. 
As that goes on, does one hand  or the other ... or 
maybe both.. . continue lifting, lifting, lifting even 
more? 
And  does that hand  stay up and  continue lifting, 
lifting, lifting even higher and higher all by itself? 
Does the other hand want to catch up with it and 
go up too, or will the other hand  just relax in your 
lap? 
That's  right.  And  does  the  hand  continue  lifting, 
lifting,  lifting  as  it  is,  or  will  the  lifting  get 
smoother  or  less  smooth  as  the  hand  continues 
upward toward  your face? 
Vary what you say according to the client's  move- 
ments! 
Now.. . Does the hand slow down or go faster and 
faster as it approaches  your face deepening your 
comfort?  Will  it ...  pause  a  bit  before  it  finally 
touches  your  face  so  you'll  know  you  are  really 
going into a trance? And it won't  touch until your 
Unconscious.. . is really, really ready to let you go 
deeper.. . will it? 
And. .. will your body automatically take a deeper 
breath when that hand touches  your face and  you 
really  relax and  experience  yourself going  deeper 
and deeper? 
Out Breath 
22.        That's  right.  And  will  you even  bother  to notice 
you're  deepening the  comfortable  feeling  as  that 
hand  slowly goes  back  to  your lap  all  by itself? 
And  will  your Unconscious  be in a dream by the 
time that hand comes to rest? 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
Insert suggestions. 
In Breath 
Bring client out of  trance: "In a  moment, I  am going to count 
backwards from 10 to 1, and  I  want you to awaken one tenth of 
the way with each number until  you are  fully awake. 10.. . 9.. . 
8.. . etc." 
The paragraph following this recaps Questions 16-21 to show how 
your breathing, head  position and  voice  direction can  reinforce 
your suggestions. With a little practice, this coordination of  your 
breathing, speaking and movement will become natural and easy. 
You need to tilt your head forward, speaking to the client's stom- 
ach or feet. Just before each time you say the word 'lift,' raise your 
head towards the ceiling while taking a deep, full, audible breath, 
so that 'lift'  is the first word you speak on your out-breath. The 
changing direction of  your voice and the sound of  your breathing 
will give powerful suggestions to the client's Unconscious Mind, 
causing them to match your breathing and your body movements. 
This will give lift to their arms! 
(Start  with  head  down,) Have  you  noticed  your  hands 
(move head up and breathe in) lifting, lifting, lifting even 
more lightly, even more easily, and by themselves ... as the 
rest  of  your  body  (move head  down  and  breathe out) 
relaxes more and more? As that goes on, does one hand or 
the other.. . or maybe both.. . continue (move head up and 
breathe in) lifting, lifting,  lifting even mow? (move head 
down and breathe out) And  does that hand  stay up and 
continue  (move head  up and  breathe in) lifting,  lifting, 
lifting even higher and higher all by itself?  Does the other 
hand want to catch up with it and go up too, or will the 
other hand (move head down and breathe out) just relax in 
your  lap? That's  right. And does the hand continue (move  
head up and breathe in) lifting,  lifting, lifting as it is, or 
-7r ~  7  .  -   l:A:--- --L   -,--,, 
rl,,, 
,, 
7,"- 
omI.n+E. 
+Lo LnMJ 
WZll  VW lljLZng  geL  srnvuLrrrr  o r   ~   3   3         D r r b u u C r b   wu  C I ~ C .  r b w r s w  
continues upward toward  your face? Now .... Does the 
Two Ericksonian inductions 
hand  slow down or go faster and  faster as it approaches 
your  face  deepening  your comfort? Will it. .. pause a  bit 
before it finally touches your face so  you'll  know you are 
really going into a trance? And  it won't touch until  your 
Unconscious.. . is really, really ready to let you go deeper.. . 
will it? And ... will your body automatically take a deep- 
r breath (keep head  up and breathe in) when that hand 
ouches  your  face  and  you  re 
ourselfgoing deeper and deepe 
You will often want to ad-lib this series of  questions. Some clients' 
hands may rise a couple of  inches, and some may go all the way to 
their faces. Any time the hand comes off  the leg, you have a suc- 
cessful arm levitation. 
Chapter 11 
Ericksonian Interventions 
Ericksonian Interventions 
The purpose of  our first two Ericksonian inductions was to pro- 
vide practice for you, the Hypnotherapist, in inducing trance and 
in teaching your client how to go into trance. In this chapter, we 
will  discuss steps  for  an  Ericksonian intervention to  assist  the 
client in making changes they want to make. These steps will form 
a general hypnosis paradigm that can serve as a model for much 
of  the hypnotherapy you offer. 
I use a combination of  Time-Line Therapy@, NLP techniques and 
hypnosis in working with clients. These three systems overlap and 
complement  each  other.  I  generally  use  hypnosis  when  I  am 
guiding a client in physical healing or when I cannot complete an 
intervention using Time-Line Therapy@ or NLP techniques. 
Whereas Neuro-Linguistic Programming offers a variety of  specific 
interventions, hypnosis is a generalized intervention. For example, 
in NLP we may anchor a resourceful state, change an unsuccessful 
strategy, shift a client's values, or integrate conflicting parts of  the 
client's Unconscious. Each of  these interventions targets a specific 
area of  the Unconscious the  way a surgical procedure targets a 
specific area of  the body. 
A hypnotic intervention has  a  broader transformative scope. In 
hypnosis,  we  usually  give  more  generalized  suggestions  for 
accomplishing  the  desired  change.  Consider  the  example  of   a 
client who has the problem of  excessive impulse buying. Using 
NLP, we might intervene by changing the specific buying strategy 
the client uses. Using hypnosis, however, we might give a strong 
general suggestion that  the client  will  no longer buy  unneeded 
items. 
There are hundreds of  books available on how to do hypnothera- 
py. The Am
e
rican Institute of  Hypnotherapy offers 111 courses on 
hypnosis, and ea     of  these courses is based on a different book. 
Well over half the b  oks currently in print include specific ways of 
doing interventions. Many of  them provide scripts. If  you  have 
access to the Internet, you will find over 100 scripts at our web site: 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
Though you may often want to use a script for a specific situation, 
the general hypnosis paradigm we are about to discuss will pre- 
pare you to work confidently without a script in many cases. 
Milton Erickson would generally interview a new client a week 
before doing the first intervention with them. During the ensuing 
week, he would customize an intervention for the client, working 
from  his  case  notes  and  outlines  of  possible  things  to  say.  In 
designing interventions for your clients, you will find the follow- 
ing paradigm useful. 
General Hypnosis Paradigm 
A.        Preparation. Define desired outcome. Obtain personal his- 
tory.  Accomplish  pre-talk  and  suggestibility  tests.  (See 
Chapters 6,7.) 
B.          Induction. Use a formal or informal trance induction. (See 
Chapters 10, 14, 16, 17.) 
C.   Utilization. Utilize all of  the client's behavior to help them 
achieve and deepen trance. Observe hypnotic phenomena 
to gauge client's level of  trance. (See Chapters 5,  8.) 
Change Work 
See notes beginning on next  page for detailed explanations of  the follow- 
ing 6  steps. 
As you follow these steps, change the wording to fit the situation, 
rather than referring generally to 'the problem.' 
Does your Unconscious Mind know what to do to 
solve the problem? 
Is it possible for your Unconscious Mind to heal 
the condition? 
Ericksonian  Interventions 
3.         Is it all right to heal this now or to organize the steps 
now for healing? 
4.          Are  there  any  other  problems your  Unconscious 
Mind would like to work on? 
5.          Unconscious  Mind,  go  ahead  and  heal  (client's 
name). 
6.         How quickly will your Unconscious Mind start the 
healing? How quickly will it finish? 
Bringing the Client Out 
In a moment, I am going to count backwards from 
10 to 1, and I want you to awaken one tenth of  the 
way with each number until you are fully awake. 
10 ... 9... 8... etc. 
Notes on Steps for Change Work 
Step 1. Does your Unconscious Mind know what to do to solve the 
problem? Does  it  know  how  to  assist  the  client  in  having  the 
problem  disappear?  About  three-quarters  of   the  time,  the 
Unconscious Mind will answer "Yes." This answer is a sign to both 
you and the client that the client is establishing rapport with their 
Unconscious. 
If  the Unconscious Mind says it does not know how to solve the 
problem,  you  need  to  get  the  client  in  touch  with  additional 
resources. One of  the main tenets of  Ericksonian hypnosis is, "Our 
clients have all the resources they need to solve whatever prob- 
lems they bring to us." In this case, the added resource may be the 
Higher Self. You can ask, 
"Can your Unconscious Min  .get in touch with the blueprint of 
perfect  health  and  healing  that  exists  in  the  Higher  Self  and 
transfer  it  to the blueprint  that  the  Unconscious Mind  uses  to 
create the body? " 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
Whether  or  not  you  believe  that  there  is  a  Higher  Self  (and 
whether  or  not  the  client  believes  it),  the  client's  Unconscious 
Mind will usually respond positively to this question and find that 
it then knows how to solve the problem! 
If  the Unconscious Mind  does not respond to this appeal to the 
Higher Self, 1 usually  move  to  Time-Line  Therapy@,  which  can 
readily be  introduced while the client is in  trance. If  you  need 
information on Time-Line Therapy@, you will find a full descrip- 
tion  of  methods in  my  book  Time-Line  Therapy  and  the  Basis  of 
Personality. 
Step 2. Is i t  possible  for your Unconscious Mind  to heal the con- 
dition?  As  before,  if  the  answer  is "No,"  ask  the  Unconscious 
Mind  to  get  in  touch  with  the  blueprint of  perfect  health  and 
healing that exists in the Higher Self. Assume that it is possible for 
the Unconscious Mind to heal virtually anything that the client has 
brought to you as a presenting problem. My personal experience- 
and  countless  experiments  in  hypnosis  documented  since  the 
1860s
-show that once we enlist the aid of the Unconscious Mind, 
miraculous things can be done. 
If  you have unlimited beliefs about what your client can do and 
you describe your beliefs in terms that the client can relate to, you 
can  play  a  powerful role in facilitating the client's  changes. Of 
course, the ultimate responsibility for changes rests with the client. 
The changes they accomplish will result from their own commu- 
nication with their Unconscious Mind. I regularly tell my clients, 
"You can do anything, but whether or not you actually do, depends 
on your ability to communicate with your Unconscious Mind. I'm 
here to help you develop that ability." 
Step 3. Is i t  all right to heal this now or to organize the steps now 
for healing? Sometimes the Unconscious Mind will know what to 
do and will acknowledge that the desired change is possible, but 
will feel that it is not alright to go ahead and make the change. 
If  we accept the paradigm that the Unconscious Mind has the well- 
being of  the body as a prime concern, this seems contradictory. 
There are several reasons that the Unconscious might not consid- 
er it all right to solve the problem. The Unconscious Mind can get 
Ericksonian Interventions 
into a mode where it is mistaken about what it is supposed to do, 
as  the  result  of   a  stream  of   misleading  messages  filtering  in 
through the Conscious Mind: "Do this. Feel this." 
In  processing  continuous  input  from  the media,  the  Conscious 
Mind can get fixated on disease. Every day TV  news programmes 
feature stories about diseases, giving the Conscious Mind far more 
information about disease than about health. Advertising for Cold 
Capsules announces that "Cold  and flu season is here." People 
comply  by  catching  the  flu.  The  media's  focus  on  disease  can 
convince an Unconscious Mind that it is not its job to be well. But 
typically  when  reminded  that its highest  job  is  to  preserve the 
body, the Unconscious Mind will come around to acknowledging 
and doing that job. My recommendation is that you work with the 
Unconscious Mind and remind it of  its magnificent purpose. 
In other situations, the client's Unconscious Mind may think that 
they are guilty of  something and need  to be punished. You  will 
need to lead the client in working through the guilt, using Time- 
Line  Therapy@ or  reframing  the  incident  to  which  the  client 
attaches guilt. 
In getting the client's  Unconscious Mind to acknowledge that it is 
all  right  to  solve  a  problem,  skill  in  reframing is  very  useful. 
Reframing consists of  leading the client to see a different context 
or a different meaning for a behavior+ither    their own or some- 
one else's. This is a key skill in hypnotherapy and NLP. 
My  NLP  Practitioner and  Master  Practitioner training includes 
step-by-step information on how to do reframing. I recommend 
Erickson  and  Rossi's  book  Life  Reframing  in  Hypnosis.  Leslie 
LeCron's book Self  Hypnotism  will a 
informa- 
tion about reframing and the 
Step  4.  Are  there  any  other 
would like to work on? The Unconscious Mind may have its own 
agenda of  things it needs to work on. If  it responds "Yes" to this 
question, you need to find out what else it wants to work on and 
loop back up to Step 1. 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
Step 4 is an optional question. I skip this question if  I am working 
on a life-threatening disease with a client. On the other hand, if  the 
client has come to me for help in losing weight, I would certainly 
ask their Unconscious Mind, "Are there any other problems you 
would like to work on?" 
Step  5.  Unconscious  Mind,  go  ahead  and  heal  (client's  name). 
Sometimes  the  Unconscious  Mind  knows  what  to  do  and 
acknowledges that it is possible and all right for it to do it, but feels 
it does not have permission from the Conscious Mind. 
Most people give their Unconscious Minds conflicting information 
on a regular basis. Examples might be that one day a certain per- 
son is wonderful and the next day they are no good; one day you 
like someone and the next day you don't.  The Unconscious Mind 
gets confused about this because it takes literally everything that 
you tell it and think about. You give the Unconscious Mind clear 
permission in Step 5, so that it knows to go ahead and heal the 
condition. 
Step 6. How quickly will the Unconscious Mind start the healing? 
How  quickly  will  i t   finish?  Typically  you  need  to  give  the 
Unconscious Mind some parameters right away. If  you are work- 
ing on a  physiological condition,  such as a bleeding ulcer,  you 
need to say to the Unconscious, "How  quickly will you start to 
heal this condition? Sometimes Unconscious Minds like to begin 
healing things like ulcers right away; and sometimes they like to 
take a long,  long time to start the process,  maybe as long as 24 
hours. Which  would  you  prefer?" The  Unconscious Mind  will 
then give you a start time. 
Then say to the Unconscious Mind, "How long will it take you to 
finish the healing  process? Sometimes Unconscious Minds like 
to  finish  the healing  process  in  a  relatively  short  time,  like  as 
little as.. . ." Now  your knowledge of  the body comes into play. 
If  you  are  going  to  do  physiological  work,  you  ought  to  read 
Deepak Chopra's  Quantum Healing. It has a number of  metaphors 
about  how  quickly  the  Mind/Body unit  can  heal  itself.  In  the 
case  of  a  bleeding ulcer,  we  have  a brand  new  stomach lining 
every five days. Therefore, a bleeding ulcer can totally disappear 
in five days. 
Ericksonian Interventions 
If  the Unconscious Mind does not want to start healing right away, 
do you encourage it to, or do you give it as much time as it needs? 
I prefer giving the Unconscious Mind reasonable parameters and 
then let it choose the time it wants to take to start. The way I see it, 
sometimes an Unconscious Mind may have a list of  things on its 
agenda already and may need to finish those. So it may say,  "Well, 
my dance card is full today, but I can certainly start tomorrow at 
noon." 
Case History 
A client came to see me with a bleeding ulcer. As I worked 
through   the  6   steps  described  above,   the  client's 
Unconscious Mind  told  me,  "Yes,  I  know what to do to
heal  the  ulcer.  It  is  possible.  It  is  OK."  I  said,  "OK, 
Unconscious Mind, how quickly will you start to heal this 
ulcer? Sometimes Unconscious Minds like to begin heal- 
ing things like ulcers right away, and sometimes they like 
to take a long, long time to start the process, maybe as long 
as 24 hours. How long will you take?" 
The client's  Unconscious Mind  replied, "I'd  like to start 
right  away."  I  said,  "How  quickly  will  you  finish? 
Sometimes Unconscious Minds like to finish the healing 
process in as short as five days. Sometimes Unconscious 
Minds like to take a long, long time to finish healing, like 
seven days." 
The Unconscious Mind said it would take 7 days to heal 
the bleeding ulcer. When the client went to the doctor 7 
days later, there was no trace of  the ulcer. That is not any- 
thing miraculous. We simply enlisted the aid of  the client's    
Unconscious Mind to do the healing. 
What was interesting was that my  client wrote me three 
months  later  and  sounded  totally  empowered  by  the 
process. He said, "I had recreated my bleeding ulcer. This 
time I decided I was as good as you were, Tad. I figured I 
could get rid of it myself, and so I did!" The exciting thing 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
\ 
was that the client could now talk directly to his Uncon- 
scious Mind without my help. He was fully able to heal 
himself, drawing on a closer, deeper relationship with his 
Unconscious Mind. 
Chapter 12 
The Pendulum and 
Other Ideomotor Signals 
The Pendulum and  Other Zdeomotor Signals 
The General Hypnosis Paradigm in Chapter 11 is a pattern for car- 
rying on a dialogue with the client's  Unconscious Mind while the 
client is in trance. A pendulum can be a useful tool for facilitating 
the dialogue when the client has not yet displayed some of  the 
deeper  trance  phenomena,  or  when  they  want  relief  from  a 
problem and are not yet ready to deal with the underlying cause. 
Case History 
Here is an example of  how I have used a pendulum with 
great success. A woman came to me who had been brutal- 
ly attacked by a mugger three days earlier. Each night since 
the mugging,  she had awakened screaming. Although it 
was agony for her to talk about the incident, she was very 
willing to go into a trance to get rid of  the problem. Her 
desired  outcome was to sleep through the night,  feeling 
rested upon awakening. 
I hung a pendulum from the woman's finger, and began a 
discussion with her Unconscious Mind via the pendulum. 
I asked, "Can I please have a signal for 'Yes.'  And  can I 
please  have  a  signal  for  'No?"'   The  pendulum  clearly 
swung  in  opposite  directions  to  show  her  Unconscious 
Mind's  responses. 
I asked, "Does your Unconscious Mind know what to do to 
sleep soundly through the night?" Her  Unconscious sig- 
nalled, "Yes." 
I asked,  "Is  it  possible to  release any  negative emotions 
necessary  to  get  rid  of  this  problem,  so  you  can  sleep 
through  the  night?" Her  Unconscious Mind  responded, 
"Yes." 
I continued, "Is it OK to release those negative emotions?" 
The Unconscious Mind gave me a clear, "Yes." 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
I[ said, "OK,  Unconscious Mind, go ahead. How quickly 
would you like to start the process of  releasing the nega- 
tive emotions? Sometime Unconscious Minds like to start 
right away and sometimes they like to take as much as 12 
to  24  hours to begin the process. Would you like to start 
right away?" 
The Unconscious Mind signalled, "No." I liked the "No" 
at  that  point,  because  it  showed  me  that  the  woman's 
Unconscious Mind was really considering what to do. 
"Would you like to start in 12 hours?" Her Unconscious 
replied, "Yes." 
I continued, "Sometimes Unconscious Minds like to finish 
processes like this very, very quickly, like in as little as 24 
hours. Sometimes they like to take a  long,  long  time  to 
solve problems like this, for example as much as 48 hours. 
Would you like to finish in 48 hours?" A clear "No." 
"Would you like to finish in 24 hours?" Again, "No." 
I tried once more: "Would you like to finish in less than 24 
hours?" Still, "No." I was at least pleased  that we were 
communicating. 
I asked, "Would you like to finish in 36 hours?" And the 
woman's  Unconscious Mind, via the pendulum, showed 
an unhesitating "Yes." 
That night the woman woke up and  screamed. The fol- 
lowing night and every night after, she slept through the 
night and awakened rested. This was a very general inter- 
vention with  the Unconscious Mind, in that I asked her 
Unconscious Mind to simply let go of  whatever it needed 
to let go of, so that the client could be comfortable. From 
the point of  view of  Time-Line Therapy@, this intervention 
did not handle the root cause.. . . In fact, the client was noi 
ready  to  handle  it.  What  I  recommended  was  that  the 
client get help in handling the traumatic material once she 
was comfortable enough to do that. 
The Pendulum and  Other Ideomotor Signals 
When to Use a Pendulum 
When a client asks for help with a presenting problem, very often 
neither you nor the client will be aware of  the mental source of  the 
problem. In doing an intervention, Erickson regularly focused not 
only on clearing up the presenting problem, but on handling the 
underlying concerns of  the  patient's  Unconscious  Mind. Other- 
wise, the problem might readily recur. 
If  you use a pendulum intervention, for example, to help a client 
heal a bleeding ulcer, unless you have dealt with the root cause of 
the  ulcer,  the client  may  re-manifest  it  later. The  most  effective 
intervention I know for leading a client to heal a physical condi- 
tion is to first  use Time-Line Therapy@ to deal with  the mental 
source of  the condition, and then use hypnosis, possibly with a 
pendulum, to address the physical condition itself. 
I carry a pendulum with me all the time, because it is a useful tool 
for working with a client who has difficulty going into trance, or 
cannot do Time-Line Therapy@ due to lack of  concentration, inabil- 
ity to visualize, or resistance to floating above their Time-Line. The 
pendulum of  itself  can facilitate a trance induction. Also,  as the 
client begins to see the responses their Unconscious Mind is mak- 
ing, the pendulum is a powerful convincer. 
How to Use a Pendulum 
You  need two items for a pendulum intervention: the pendulum 
itself, and a pendulum chart. 
It is best to have a pendulum that hangs from a finger clip. (See 
picture on page 108.) This will keep the pendulum steadily fixed 
on the finger and allow it to swing freely. It will also avoid the 
client's being distracted by the need to hold on to a string or chain. 
You  can find this type of  pendulum at a New Age bookstore or 
order one from Advanced Neuro Dynamics at 1-800-800-6463. 
You may copy the following pendulum chart. 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
1 
The Pendulum and Other Ideomotor Signals 
Pendulum Chart 
I Maybe    I 
Yes 
Not Sure 
................................................................. 
I 
i Not Sure 
i 
Yes 
Mavbe  i 
Begin by showing the client how to sit and hold their arm to use 
the pendulum, with their elbow resting on a stable surface (a table- 
top  or  desk  is  best). The  forearm  should  be  almost  vertical, 
suspended in mid-air. The hand should be totally relaxed, hanging 
from the wrist. (See picture on page 108.) 
In  moving the client's  arm  and  hand  to  this position, you  can 
induce arm catalepsy (or 'waxy  flexibility') by applying in your 
touch the principle that "ambiguity in any representational system 
will cause trance to occur." Touch the client's hand very lightly in 
guiding their forearm to the vertical position. In fact,  touch the 
hand so  lightly that  your  touch is ambiguous,  meaning that  the 
client is not sure of  the very  last moment in  which your touch 
occurred. While their Unconscious Mind is fixed on this ambigu- 
ous touch, leave the arm suspended in mid-air. 
This  arm  catalepsy  induction,  from  Erickson  and  Rossi's 
Experiencing Hypnosis, will increase your client's comfort in using 
the pendulum and make the process more likely to be successful. 
With the client's arm cataleptic, clip the pendulum on their pointer 
finger. If  this is the first time the client is using a pendulum, you 
will be getting their Unconscious Mind used to some new sensa- 
tions as you instruct it how to respond. You need to ask the client's 
Unconscious Mind to choose three signals: "Yes," "No," and "Not 
consciously ready to know yet." 
Begin by saying to the client, "Can your Unconscious Mind give 
me a signal for 'Yes'  that is easy to see? Sometimes Unconscious 
Minds like to give me a signal for 'Yes'  like this." Take the pendu- 
lum and hold it out almost horizontal, and then let it swing back 
and forth in a wide arc. Say, "This would be a perfectly appropri- 
ate signal." 
Continue by saying, "And sometimes Unconscious Minds like to 
give me a signal for 'Yes'  that is easy to see, like this." This time let 
the  pendulum  swing  in  the  opposite  direction,  saying,  "This 
would also be a perfectly appropriate signal." 
This demonstration gives the Unconscious Mind  and  the finger 
the feeling or the kinesthetics of  the swing. 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
Now say to the client, "Please ask your Unconscious Mind to show 
us a signal for 'Yes.'  Then repeat inside your head several times, 
'Signal for Yes, Signal for Yes.'  That's  right." Allow plenty of  time. 
If  after waiting you see only an ambiguous or very weak signal, 
say,  "Good.  Now  can  your  Unconscious  Mind  go  ahead  and 
amplify that signal so it is very easy to see. That's right." 
If  you are using the pendulum chart, place it under the pendulum 
now, aligning it to correspond to the 'Yes'  signal. 
Now  repeat  the  process  to  elicit  signals  for  "No"  and  "Not 
Consciously Ready To  Know Yet." Very often, though not always, 
"Yes" and "No" will be exact opposite directions corresponding to 
the crossed lines on the chart. Sometimes the Unconscious Mind 
will  give circular  signals,  swinging  the  pendulum clockwise or 
counterclockwise.. .  or  both.  Acknowledge  and  encourage  the 
Unconscious Mind: "Thank you very much,  Unconscious Mind, 
for communicating so helpfully." 
Once you have set up a system of  clear signals with the client's 
Unconscious Mind, follow the General Hypnosis Paradigm from 
Chapter 11. 
Additional Notes on use of  the Pendulum 
With some clients it works better to induce trance first and then 
introduce the pendulum. Most clients, however, use the pendulum 
well without any formal trance induction. This provides a great 
advantage with clients who initially resist entering trance. 
The pendulum is a biofeedback device. It works through the inte- 
gration of  Conscious and Unconscious processes. This means the 
client needs to see the pendulum and its signals. Their conscious- 
ness of  the movements of  the pendulum sets the stage for  their 
Unconscious Mind to communicate through this medium. 
Sometimes the client will be concerned about interfering with the 
signals from their Unconscious Mind. They may say, "I'm not sure 
I  trust  the  answers  I  am  getting,"  or  "I  just  don't  trust  my 
Conscious Mind not to interfere." If  this is the case, you can tell the 
The Pendulum and Other Ideomotor Signals 
client, "Simply do not interfere with the pendulum. Hold a neutral 
thought in your mind and let whatever happens, happen." 
If  the client is still concerned, as you are asking a question, block 
their view with a piece of  paper. This means actually holding a 
piece of  paper between the client's  face and the pendulum. The 
moment the client begins to answer, pull the piece of  paper away, 
so they can see the swing of  the pendulum. This will maintain the 
biofeedback nature of  the process. 
The pendulum has proved to be an excellent avenue to having a 
full conversation with the Unconscious Mind without deep trance. 
Other Ideomotor Signals 
The pendulum is most often used with the assistance of  another 
person. There are two other ideomotor signals (that is, body move- 
ments that carry a message from the Unconscious Mind) that can 
easily  be  practised  alone,  without being  noticeably  in  trance. I 
generally teach these to kids for use in school, but anyone can use 
them. 
The first signal is called 'Sticky.' This is mainly for "Yes-No" ques- 
tions. Take a plastic notebook. Touch the top padded part of  your 
pointer-finger to the waxy plastic covering of  the notebook. 
Rub  your finger  back  and forth sideways along the edge, fairly 
quickly. Ask your Unconscious Mind for a "Yes" signal. Rub back 
and forth again, asking for a "No" signal. Notice the difference in 
the drag of  your finger across the plastic for the two answers. Once 
you have established "Yes" and "No," concentrate on one question 
at a time, and use Sticky to let your Unconscious Mind tell you the 
answer. Each of  the students to whom I have taught Sticky has 
seen at least a full point increase in their grade average! 
The second signal is called 'ABCD.' This is mainly for answering 
multiple-choice test questions. For ABCD use your non-dominant 
hand. Rest the heel of that hand on your knee, so that your fingers 
are hanging loose. The fingers should not touch the knee because 
you  want  to  get  the  full  ideomotor  response.  With  attention 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
focused on your fingers, ask your Unconscious Mind, "Give me a 
signal  for  A."  Wait  for  the signal ... a  slight  movement of  one 
finger. "Give me a signal for B." Wait for the signal. After seeing 
the signals for all four answers, concentrate on a multiple-choice 
question and watch your fingers for the response. Can you imag- 
ine how  valuable ABCD  is in a classroom setting? One  of  our 
students who taught  this signal  to his nephew  reports that  the 
nephew scored a  "96" on a multiple-choice science examination 
for which the highest grade up to that point had been an "85." 
Is this cheating? How do we know the student has learned any- 
thing? My response is that all learning, behavior, and change takes 
place in the Unconscious Mind. All we are doing is finding effec- 
tive ways to communicate with the Unconscious Mind and access 
the information which is already stored in it. There is no cheating 
involved here! The fact is that  the Unconscious Mind  faithfully 
records everything that we experience. If  you can simply tune in 
to  the Unconscious Mind,  you  have  access to  any  answer  you 
need. 
With  clients I prefer  to use the  pendulum rather than Sticky or 
ABCD,  because  the  movement of  the  pendulum  is  so  easy  to 
observe. During a school test, however, you cannot have your son 
or daughter say, "Excuse me, I'm going to get out my pendulum!" 
Chapter 13 
Metaphors 
Metaphors 
In Chapter 4,  we discussed the hypnotic language patterns of  the 
Milton Model, which Erickson developed for use in a permissive, 
indirect style for inducing trance. We  noted that the key principle 
underlying Milton Model patterns is that ambiguity in any represen- 
tational system causes trance. 
Over the years, Erickson discovered that he could lead a patient 
into trance without any formal induction by  telling stories  that 
would  engage the curiosity of  the patient's  Unconscious Mind, 
opening a channel for direct dialogue with the Unconscious. These 
stories are metaphors. 
In this chapter, you will be reading examples of  metaphors. They 
will include words in italics in many places. The italics are not for 
emphasis, but for drawing your attention to words or phrases that 
are  examples  of   Milton  Model  patterns  from  Chapter  4  or 
Ericksonian  techniques,  such  as  embedded  commands,  from 
Chapter 9. We  will discuss loops later in the chapter. 
Multiple Embedded Metaphors 
Open Loop No.1 
Now it took Erickson a long time to develop the smoothest ways to put 
a patient in touch with their Unconscious Mind. Think about this for 
just a minute. He was in practice doing hypnosis every single day, 
from 1920 until his death in 1980. And during that period of  60 
years, he would often see 14  patients a day, sometimes 7 days a 
week. Now the way I see it, if  you did that, you'd  get  pretty good  at 
hypnosis too. You'd  figure  out  what  to  do  after  a while,  and  what 
Erickson said was, "It took me a long time to learn this, but once I 
learned  it,  my  hypnosis became  a  lot  better. I was  much  more 
easily able to  facilitate  trance in my  patients. And  I realized that 
most of  what needs to happen in hypnosis is utilization. We  need 
to  discover  and  utilize  already  occurring  phenomena  that  the 
patient brings to the hypnotic session." And so he said, "Whereas 
during the early days, I would tell the client what to do, saying, 
'Go into a trance,'  now I don't say that any more." He said, "One of 
the things I did in the process of learning how to communicate with 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
the  Unconscious  Mind  was  that  in  the early  days,  I actually sat 
down at a typewriter and typed out 30 pages of  notes." Imagine 
that. "Single spaced, narrow margins, typewritten pages, with all 
the things I could say  to show a patient how  to go  into a trance 
easily. And," he said, "with experience as I continued my practice, 
I was able to reduce that to 25 pages, and then 20, and then 15, and 
then 10, and then 9 pages, 8 pages, and then 7,  then 6,  then 5, and 4, and 
3, and  then 2,  and then 1. And then," he said, "I could reduce it to 
one paragraph, and then one sentence, and then I realized I didn't 
need to use words at all. What I discovered was that by utilizing 
the naturally occurring states in a client, I could begin to assist the 
client to go deeply into trance." 
And so what is really important as we discuss Ericksonian hypno- 
sis is the ability to look at a person and see what state they are in.. . 
and anticipate things  they  are about  to  do  before they are aware of 
those things themselves. This  is Utilization,  as we  discussed in 
Chapter 5. Utilization depends on your ability to pay  attention  to 
details. 
Open Loop No.2 
And if  I could give you a gift, it would be the gift of  curiosity. I 
don't  know if  you remember when you were a kid, but when I was a 
kid, my dad used to hide the Christmas presents in the closet in his 
bedroom. And I always wanted to know what they were. Didn't 
you? So,  I'd  wait .... I grew up in Syracuse where there's  lots of 
snow, and when my parents would go outside to shovel the drive- 
way I'd run over to the bedroom, over to my Dad's closet, and I'd 
pull up a chair. Then I'd look out the window and see how they 
were doing. Then I'd  run back and  reach way  up and grab the 
biggest present. And what's the first thing you do with a present? 
Shake it.. . . 'Cause you want to know what's  inside. Then you look at 
the outer wrapper. And  you can  tell a lot  of  things from  outer 
wrappers, can't  you?  You  can.  And  you  see  what else  you  can 
notice. Like, is the box heavy, is the paper thin? Which store did it 
come from? After a while you begin to notice that certain wrappers 
are thin enough  to see  through. And, if  you really feel  daring, and if 
you feel you have a lot of  time, from time to time, you might just 
peel the paper back a little way carefully hoping not to rip the 
Metaphors 
wrapping. You  did this, I know you did.. .hoping not to rip the 
wrapping paper and then you look inside. If  I could give you a 
gift, it would be that kind of  curiosity, that kind of  curiosity about 
what in the world is going on over there, as you look at your client, 
as you pay close attention to every detail. 
Open Loop No.3 
In fact, Erickson tells a wonderful story that is written up in the 
book  My   Voice  Will  Go  With  You,  by  Sidney  Rosen.  One  of 
Erickson's  students, whom we will call John, was fascinated by 
hypnosis and wanted to learn  everything there is  to  know about it. 
Erickson told John to pay close attention, very close attention to the 
people around him. John was in college, and one day a professor 
said to him, "John, how are you going to do on the test?" And John 
said,  "I'll  do  very  well,  Professor,  because  you  only  have  10 
questions, and they are.. . " And John proceeded to name the 10 
questions.  Now  the  professor  was  shocked,  and  said,  "John, 
you've  obviously gone into my  desk,  because not only  do you 
know the 10 questions, but you know them in order. We  are going 
to  the Dean." So  he  took John to  the Dean  and  the Dean said, 
"John, have you been cheating?" And John said, "No,  I haven't 
and I can prove it. Please send someone to my  room to get my 
notebook." So they sent another student to John's room to get his 
notebook. When the student brought it back, they opened it up 
and found that John had taken incredibly good notes. Next to some 
things he' d  put one asterisk, and next to some things he'd  put 2 asterisks, 
and next to some things he'd  put 3, and next to some, 4.. . or 5, and next 
to some, 6.. . but only next to a few  things did John put 7 asterisks, and 
they  weren't  numbered 1, 2,  3, 4, 5. No, no. The first one was 6,  the 
second was 1, and the third was 4, and so on. And John said, "You 
know, you can tell a lot by paying attention to what a professor is 
saying, because they all have their own ideas about what they like 
and what they don't  like." And he said, "All I did was pay atten- 
tion,  and  listen  carefully to  his  tone  of   voice,  and  look  at  him." You 
know,  Erickson thought that John was one of  his best students. 
Now  in fact,  he  was always telling students to  pay  attention  to 
things they normally did not pay attention to.. . things that other 
people said and did. He knew that by paying attention, they could 
begin to turn on the power of their client's Unconscious Mind. 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
Open Loop No.4 
One  of   the  most  dramatic  examples  of   the  power  of   the 
Unconscious is given in the book The  Psychobiology of   Mind/Body 
Healing, where Ernest Rossi writes about a case that was reported 
in the Journal of   The American Medical Association. Mr. Right was a 
lung cancer  patient in  the  '50s,  when  the  drug  Krebiozen  was 
introduced. He had had cancer for quite some time, and was con- 
vinced that somewhere along the way, there would be a drug that 
would cure him and he would finally be healed. He was on oxygen 
and had less than three months to live, in the opinion of  his doc- 
tors. Krebiozen was announced and Mr. Right's hospital was given 
the authorization to use Krebiozen in the first round of  testing. The 
doctor decided to use Mr. Right as one of  his test patients, even 
though he didn't quite meet the criteria of  being able to participate 
in the test. Mr. Right was given Krebiozen on a Friday for the first 
time. His doctor left for the weekend, leaving instructions with the 
nurses to administer Krebiozen till Monday. 
When he came back on Monday, the doctor was amazed to find 
Mr.  Right  out  of  his bed  and  walking around  the cancer  ward 
telling  all  the  other  patients  the  wonders  of   Krebiozen. 
Understandably excited, the doctor examined Mr. Right immedi- 
ately and found  remarkable improvements. Then he  hurried  to 
examine  the other  patients in  the ward  who  had  also  received 
Krebiozen. With the other patients, he found no change. 
Mr. Right's injections continued. After a month or two, he was well 
enough to leave the hospital. He returned to his hobby of  flying his 
private plane, which was not equipped with a pressurization sys- 
tem. Because of  the fact that Mr. Right was flying at 12,000 feet, his 
doctor judged that his lung cancer was cured. 
After Mr. Right had been flying and continuing his regular injec- 
tions  for  about  three  months,  a  newspaper  article  appeared, 
claiming that Krebiozen was not as effective as had originally been 
thought. Mr. Right called the hospital in a panic and asked his doc- 
tor, "What's  going on here?" His doctor said, "I  don't  know. I'll 
have to call the makers of  Krebiozen and find out." Within a week 
Mr. Right's  tumors had reformed and he was back in the hospital 
on oxygen once again. 
Metaphors 
Then his doctor thought, "I'm going to try something which under 
normal circumstances I would never try." He told Mr. Right that 
he had obtained a supply of  new, improved Krebiozen, that the old 
Krebiozen  hadn't  worked  because  of  a short shelf  life. And  he 
began to give Mr. Right injections of  distilled water. As he did that, 
Mr. Right's tumors melted like a snowball on a hot stove. Within a 
month he was out of  the hospital and back flying his private plane. 
Open Loop No.5 
Now,  one of  my  favourite stories is that one day a very young 
Milton Erickson was walking down the street in the town where 
he lived, and he heard from over there somewhere a noise. And he 
said, "I  think  there's  something to  learn  here." So he looked in the 
direction of  the noise, and he saw a building and a large sign on 
top of  the building that said "Boiler Factory." So he went across the 
street, and opened a door. He could feel the tug of  the door in his 
hand as he stepped over the threshold, and then he went inside. 
And when he got inside, the noise was tremendous. And he could 
see the workers, and they were all moving purposefully back and 
forth inside this boiler factory, but he couldn't  hear them. I don't 
know if  you know this, but in those days, they used to make big 
boilers. Imagine a boiler the size of  this room. Can you? A boiler the 
size of  this room, with sheets of  steel, maybe an inch or two thick, 
and rivets along the top, and maybe there would be one rivet every 
two feet,  or  two  rivets  every  18 inches,  or  maybe  3  rivets  every foot, 
along the top, and then rivets along the ends, sealing in the ends. 
If  you could imagine being in a boiler like that. Those were the 
kind of  boilers they were making in this boiler factory. And so, 
when he got inside, Erickson said, "There's got to be something to 
learn here, because these people are communicating inside, and I 
can't  hear  them,  but  they  can  hear  each  other." But  Erickson 
couldn't hear them inside. That's  right. And so, he said, "I've got to 
learn something about this". So he stopped one of  the workers and 
said, "Can you get me the Boss? Ask the boss to come outside so I 
can speak to him." The first worker he asked didn't  know what to 
do, so he asked another worker, "Can you get me the boss? Can 
you ask the Boss to come outside so we can have a discussion?" 
The boss came outside and Erickson said, "I'd like to sleep here for 
the evening. I'm a student and I'm learning how to communicate 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
inside a boiler factory". Now in those days, I guess it was all right, 
because  the Boss  said  OK. So  Erickson  went home and  got  his 
pillow and his blanket and he went back into the boiler factory, 
and he went across the steps and pulled the door open and once 
again, all of  a sudden, there was all this noise inside ... from the 
workers going back and forth, the sheets of  steel moving on the 
conveyers, and the riveters riveting. He said, "For the life of  me, I 
almost can't  hear myself think." But he managed to find a place out of 
the way. So he laid out his pillow and his blanket and got under the 
blanket.. .snuggled  up.. .but  even  so  the  noise  was  inside  his 
head.. .loud as ever. But about midnight, he managed to take all the 
noise and put it outside his head, and then he fell asleep. Very good. 
Erickson  was  always  putting  himself  in  situations  like  that. 
Situations where he could learn. That's  right. About what happens 
inside you. Not your Conscious Mind, your Unconscious.. .and really 
Unconscious.. .and you  don't  mind, do you? 
Marginal Note: 
Metaphors  are  the  gentlest, most  elegant  way  to begin  talking 
directly with your client's  Unconscious Mind. They can be stories 
from your own experience or someone else's  (or no one's). They 
can sound realistic or mythical. They can be true stories, or stories 
invented specifically for your client's  situation. 
Have  you  noticed  that  in  front  of   an  audience  a  professional 
speaker  almost  always begins with  a  metaphor? The  speaker's 
metaphor is often a joke, but sometimes a dramatic story to intro- 
duce their subject. Speakers may or may not know why a metaphor 
is the best opening ... they may or may not realize that they are 
hooking the  attention of  the  Unconscious Minds  of  their  audi- 
ences. But they know that metaphors work. 
The content of  a well-selected metaphor will relate to something in 
the client's  (or the audience's) experience. The process of  noticing 
the parallels is part of  what triggers the Unconscious Mind's curios- 
ity and opens it to dialogue. And the ultimate aim of  the metaphor 
is to awaken in the listener a specifically targeted mental state ... 
very often the state that the character experiences in the metaphor. 
Metaphors 
The language of  a well-told metaphor will be deliciously ambigu- 
ous,  utilizing  Milton  Model  patterns freely  to  further  feed  the 
curiosity of  the client's Unconscious Mind. 
In planning a hypnotherapy session, Erickson would review his 
notes about the patient's presenting problem and personal history, 
and then choose or invent several suitable metaphors. In conduct- 
ing  the  session,  he  would  open  a  'loop'   by  starting  the  first 
metaphor and telling three-quarters or more of  it. Then he would 
break off  that story and open another loop by starting the second 
metaphor, then break off  the second and start the third. He often 
used as many as four or five metaphors. This served as an elegant 
way  to  do  a  trance  induction  without  making  any  specific 
reference to hypnosis! 
Leaving the metaphors incomplete, that is, leaving the loops open, 
excited  the  curiosity of  his  patient's  Unconscious Mind. When 
Erickson observed that the opening of  several loops had put him 
in direct communication with the patient's Unconscious, he would 
then proceed with the change work which was the purpose of  the 
session.  When  he  had  completed  the  change  work,  he  would 
'close'  the most  recently opened  loop by  telling the end  of  the 
metaphor, and go on to close all of  the loops in the reverse order 
to which he had opened them. The effect of  closing the metaphors 
was to lead the patient out of  the trance. Because Erickson chose 
metaphors very carefully, a second effect was that the story end- 
ings reinforced the change work done while the patient was in 
trance. 
Critical  to  the  effectiveness  of   Erickson's  metaphors  were  the 
'break  points'  in the stories. A well-chosen break would interrupt 
the story and leave a loop open at a point of  peak interest, with a 
sense  of   incompletion  engaging  the  curiosity  of   the  patient's 
Unconscious for the dialogue that was to follow. The closing of  the 
loop at the end would satisfy the curiosity of  the Unconscious and 
reinforce the change work. 
Before the end of  this chapter, I will be recommending that you 
experiment  with  Erickson's  method  of   choosing  a  series  of 
metaphors to  lead a  client into trance and, after  accomplishing 
intended change work, lead them back out of  it. 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
Metaphors 
Close Loop No.5 
When Milton Erickson awoke the next morning inside the boiler 
factory, the first thing he heard was the workers saying, "What 
does that kid think he can learn here, when it has taken us so long 
to learn how to communicate inside?" But he knew that he'd  learned 
something very valuable. He knew he'd  learned something that 
could carry him through his entire life. He knew because if  you 
can communicate with your Unconscious.. . your Unconscious Mind, 
you can ask it to do anything. Clear up your health, have you he happy, 
find  the way to realize your deepest desires. Just communicating with 
your Unconscious Mind. At  least that's  what Erickson  thought. 
What do you think? 
Close Loop No.4 
Six months after Mr. Right's second release from the hospital, the 
American Medical Association made the final announcement that 
Krebiozen was totally worthless in the treatment of  cancer. Within 
three days, Mr. Right returned to the hospital and died. 
What is important about this story is the healing power you have 
inside your own body. I first told this story at an NLP Practitioner 
Training. One woman in the class had a dramatic reaction to hearing 
the story. Within a week, a lump she had had in her breast disap- 
peared. The power that you have to heal is very, very important. 
Close Loop No.3 
And back in the Dean's office, the Professor said, "John, since you 
knew all 10 questions and the order they were in, I believe you know 
the answers. And the Dean said, "I'm going to recommend that you 
get an  A in this course."  In fact, Erickson said that John got all As 
because he knew how to pay attention to everything. He really knew 
how to look at  people and  listen to them, and he knew that that was a 
learning he would remember the rest of  his life. And he did. 
Close Loop No.2 
I never got caught looking at Christmas presents. I never did, I really 
never did. But  they always knew. And now that you're  a parent, 
don't  you know? There's that little telltale sign, of  the slightly ripped 
paper, and you say "I guess I'd better change my hiding place next 
year." But  all  the while,  that curiosity: Hey  what's  going on in 
there? What's  happening? Inside? 
Close Loop No.1 
And as you continue to LEARN HYPNOSIS EASILY AND EFFORT- 
LESSLY,  you may not need to develop those 30  pages  that  Erickson 
did. You can rely on his experience to talk less and  less, and observe and 
utilize more. 
And I can assure you that the more you really pay attention to detail, 
the richer your experience will be as you lead  your clients easily into 
trance and  talk with their Unconscious Minds. 
A Practical Exercise in Creating Metaphors 
If  you  had  heard  the  previous section on "Multiple  Embedded 
Metaphors" instead of  reading it, you would probably have expe- 
rienced metaphor-induced trance. The change work that I chose to 
sandwich between  the  multiple loop  openings  and  the  reverse 
order closings was a learning experience rather than the type of 
personal change that would be  more usual for  a hypnotherapy 
session. 
I invite you to take some time now to plan a similar series of  five 
multiple embedded metaphors. First choose a colleague to whom 
you will tell the metaphors. (With a specific person in mind, you 
can design the metaphors to have the effects you intend for that 
person.) Think of  five stories, 2 to 4 minutes each. Think of  what 
the  effects  will  be,  and  organize  the  stories  in  the  best  order. 
Prepare the stories in your mind, so that you can begin each one, 
tell 80 or 90% of it, and then stop and go on to the next story. 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
In choosing the content of  your metaphors, consider: 
stories about people learning things 
stories about connections people made inside 
stories of  understandings people reached 
stories that had certain effects on people 
stories of  revelations people had. 
As  you  think  about  a  story  you  may  use,  imagine the effect  it 
would have on your colleague hearing that story for the first time. 
Think of  where you can break the stories, and where you will pick 
them up again as you conclude. Plan to sandwich your content, or 
change work, in the middle. 
To  prepare for  practising these metaphors with  your colleague, 
plan as your central content some useful suggestions about learn- 
ing or about unlocking the power of  the Unconscious Mind. 
For  your convenience in planning metaphors, copy the diagram 
on page 125. 
Once you have your metaphors and central content planned, prac- 
tise them with your colleague acting as the client. Practise several 
times,  observing the effects of  your stories and  your choices of 
where to break each metaphor. Use your observations to improve 
the flow and  the effects of  your  multiple embedded  metaphors 
until you are delighted with the results. 
Metaphors 
Hypnotic Language Patterns 
Client: 
I 
Multiple  Embedded 
I 
I 
Metaphors 
I 
I 
Metaphors: 
States: 
1 I 
CONTENT: 
Break 
I 
5 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
Refining Your Style for Working with Metaphors 
Erickson often took as long as a week to design a hypnotic inter- 
vention for a patient. He took great care in planning the metaphors 
that he would use. 
As  you  begin  to experiment  with creating metaphors,  I  recom- 
mend two good sources: Therapeutic  Metaphors by David Gordon, 
and The Answer Within by Lankton and Lankton. There are also a 
number of  good courses on metaphors in the American Institute of 
Hypnotherapy's  doctorate  programme.  You  will  get  excellent 
results from a careful study of  how to design metaphors and pre- 
dict  their  effects.  The  best  teacher,  however,  will  be  your  own 
experience and experiments as you create and use metaphors. 
Do  not limit yourself  to stories that  you  have heard  or experi- 
enced. You can create stories from scratch that will exactly address 
the needs of  your clients. One of  Erickson's  famous stories is a 
deep level metaphor about tomatoes. To  a client who wanted to 
lose weight he said, "You know, I'm growing some tomatoes in my 
backyard. And the interesting thing about the tomatoes is that they 
know what to eat to be the right size. Tomatoes always come out 
to be just the size they're supposed to be." And he continued with 
a long, involved metaphor of  how a tomato pulls the nutrients up 
from the soil,  taking in the right amount of  water and the right 
amount of  nutrients. That is one way of  doing an intervention! 
As you continue to experiment with metaphors, you will find new 
ways not only to use them in inducing trance, but also to weave 
them into the change work that you do when the client is already 
in trance. And  your subtlety and effectiveness will grow. People 
love stories. The Unconscious Mind is intrigued by metaphors. 
Chapter 14 
Progressive Test Induction 
Based on Estabrooks 
Progressive Test Induction  Based on Estabrooks 
Up to this point we have focused on Erickson's  indirect, permis- 
sive approach. It is easy to learn and comfortable to use with most 
clients,  including those  who  may  have  some  hesitations  about 
being hypnotized. We  will now examine reasons for sometimes 
using  the  more  traditional approach  to  hypnotism ...  a  direct, 
authoritarian approach. 
One of  the advantages of  traditional hypnotism is its usefulness 
for producing deep trance phenomena. Even Ericksonian hypno- 
tists usually move toward a more authoritarian approach when 
they  need  to  induce deep  trance  to  elicit  the  deeper  hypnotic 
phenomena. 
Most hypnotherapy today is done in an Ericksonian style, with the 
client in a  waking state. In  traditional hypnotism, on the other 
hand, the hypnotist talks about sleep at the beginning of  the induc- 
tion  and  leads  the  client  into  a  sleeping  state.  This  is  useful 
especially  in  getting  the  client  to  forget  what  happens during 
trance. If  the desired outcome is, say, for the client to stop smoking 
or have an aversion to certain fattening foods, post-hypnotic sug- 
gestions will work best when the client forgets the suggestions; 
their Conscious Mind  will then not interfere with their carrying 
out the suggestions. 
One of  this century's greatest teachers of  the traditional approach 
was George Estabrooks, a professor at Colgate University, whose 
book Hypnotism was published in 1943. Estabrooks taught a direct, 
authoritarian approach. If  we were to begin this chapter's induc- 
tion in his style, it would sound like this: "Close your eyes. You are 
falling asleep
-sound asleep. Relax all your muscles and imagine 
that  you  are  going  into  a  deep sleep. Deeper  and  deeper  and 
deeper. You will not wake up until I tell you.. . then you will wake 
up quietly and you will feel fine as a result of  these suggestions. 
You  are falling sound, sound asleep. Deeper and deeper and deep- 
er." For your later reference, a complete induction in Estabrooks's 
direct, authoritative style appears in the appendix. 
For ease in learning and practising, we will use an induction based 
on Estabrooks's style and adapted by the addition of  Ericksonian 
indirect suggestions. 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
I call this a Progressive Test Induction. I recommend that you prac- 
tise it with a colleague, taking turns as Hypnotherapist and client. 
The induction will take the client through all six stages of  hypno- 
sis discussed in Chapter 8. Each step the client reaches will be a 
further successful test of  his ability to hypnotize himself. In other 
words,  the client's  success in  reaching each  stage  will  act  as  a 
strong convincer, so that the further into the induction you get, the 
stronger the client's  belief  will become that they are a great hyp- 
notic subject.. . the more they will lead themself inward.. . and the 
more accepting they will become of  your suggestions. 
After each test, you will lead the client to once again relax the part 
of  their body that was involved in that test. 
Each client is different. Sometimes a client will not succeed at a 
certain level of  this induction, and will then succeed very readily 
at deeper levels. If,  after a reasonable amount of  suggestion, the 
client does not produce the trance phenomenon you expect at one 
of  the levels, utilize whatever the client does instead, and move on 
to the next level. 
When the client has reached a deep level of  trance,  make post- 
hypnotic suggestions  that  will  be  of  benefit  to  them  after  the 
induction, and produce amnesia of  those suggestions. Before you 
bring the client out of  trance, the script will prompt you to remove 
any test suggestions that the client should not continue to follow 
when the induction is finished. 
As  you  use  the script below,  repeat or  expand  on sentences as 
needed, in order to maintain a smooth flow and assist the client 
into total relaxation. 
Progressive Test Induction Adapted from Estabrooks 
Close Eyes 
- 
Talk Sleep 
Now, if  you would like to just go ahead and see if  you can 
close your eyes. And I wonder if  you can imagine, every- 
body can, imagining is something you can do,  remember 
how much you imagined when you were little, or you can 
Progressive Test Induction Based  on Estabrooks 
just remember a time when you were falling asleep (yawn), 
just falling sound asleep. Now, perhaps you can remember 
a time when you were soo-oo tired, and relaxed.. . all your 
muscles totally.. . relax.. . and just remember a time when 
you were falling asleep, going into a deep sleep. Deeper 
and deeper and  deeper.. . (etc). That's  right. Now,  this is 
important, you can stay asleep as long as you want to stay 
asleep until I tell you, and remember, you will always hear 
the sound of  my  voice,  however far or deep you go and 
you will always feel just fine and be just fine as a result of 
these suggestions. So, it's OK,  just go ahead and fall sound, 
sound  asleep.  Deeper  and  deeper  and  deeper  asleep. 
(Continue talking this way for 5 minutes.) You may or may not 
remember to forget everything that happens. It's OK. 
Eyelids  Locked Closed 
Now, listen. As deeply relaxed as you are, you still know 
your eyes are closed, and you may  not have noticed that 
your eyelids feel so heavy that they are,  and  they really 
ARE locked so tightly together that you may find it quite 
amusing to discover that your eyes are locked tight, tight, 
tightly together. That's right. Your eyelids are locked tightly 
together and  you cannot open your eyes no matter how 
hard  you  try,  and  REALLY  try,  the tighter  they become. 
And you might care to try, so go ahead, I dare you to try 
and find with some amusement that you cannot. 
Relaxation.  Now  relax  everything.  Relax  your  eyelids. 
They are returning to normal, and you are sound asleep. 
Sound, sound asleep, and you will sleep until I tell you. 
Then you will awaken quietly and easily.. . until then, just 
relax everything and sleep, sleep, sleep. 
Stiff Arm 
Now  it's  time for our next  test. So  just  notice your  right 
arm, right where it is (describe) is becoming stiff and rigid, 
rigid and stiff. Stiff and rigid. And everyone knows how a 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
piece of  iron feels, so rigid and stiff, just like you.. . cannot 
bend your right arm. It's  just like an iron bar, solid, rigid, 
and stiff. It is impossible to bend your right arm's so stiff. I 
dare you to discover with some amusement you  cannot. 
That's right. 
Relaxation. Now relax everything. Relax your right arm. It 
is returning to normal, and you are sound asleep. Sound, 
sound asleep, and you will sleep until I tell you. Then you 
will  awaken  quietly  and  easily. ..  until  then,  just  relax 
everything and sleep, sleep, sleep. 
Weak Legs 
Now, even though you never thought of  this before, now 
notice it's  as if  your body is floating away, floating away, 
floating away. And  you may discover with some delight 
that you cannot control the muscles in your legs, you are so 
relaxed now. And where were you born? Do you remember? 
(The purpose of  these questions  is  to induce an age regression, 
taking  the client  back  to a time  when the motor  movements  in 
their  legs  were  not  yet  developed.) Remember! Being a little 
newborn baby .... And now, like then, you're  stuck where 
you  are,  and  your  legs  won't  work,  too  relaxed.  That's 
right. It is impossible for you to even try to stand up, too 
relaxed. And  the  harder  you  may  try,  the  more  relaxed 
your legs. You are just stuck there in the chair. You may try, 
and really try, I dare you. 
Relaxation. Now  relax everything. Relax your legs. They 
are returning to normal, and you are sound asleep. Sound, 
sound asleep, and you will sleep until I tell you. Then you 
will  awaken  quietly  and  easily ...  until  then,  just  relax 
everything and sleep, sleep, sleep. 
Automatic Movement 
Now listen carefully, more fun. It's  time for us to discover 
just what your hands can do. In a moment, I'm going to 
Progressive Test Induction  Based  on Estabrooks 
touch your hands. (When the client's  eyes are  closed, always 
tell them you are going to touch them before you do. Use ambigu- 
ous touch to establish catalepsy in one arm, then the other.) Now, 
let's start your hands rotating. Here they go. (Start the hands 
rotating.)  Here  they  go,  round  and  around.  Faster  and 
faster. Can your Unconscious.. . keep them moving? That's 
right. They ARE  rotating faster and faster. And  you  just 
might find with some delight you cannot stop them. You 
cannot stop, no matter how hard you try, the harder you 
try, the faster they go around and around. 
Relaxation. Now relax everything. (Gently hold  the hands to 
stop the rotating.) Relax your hands. They are returning to 
rest on your lap, and you are sound asleep. Sound, sound 
asleep, and you will sleep until I tell you. Then you will 
awaken quietly and easily ... until then,  just relax every- 
thing and sleep, sleep, sleep. 
Talking in Your Sleep 
Now I want you to dream, and REALLY dream of  talking 
in your sleep. Everyone knows of  someone who talks in 
their sleep. So sleep and have that dream. Now I am going 
to ask you a few simple questions, and you can just remain 
asleep in your dream, and dream you answer me in your 
sleep, talking in your sleep as you have seen other people 
talk in their sleep. Soon I'm going to ask questions you will 
find it easy to answer.. . here they are: 
What is your name?  (Wait for an answer,  possibly repeat the 
question.) 
What is your address? 
Relaxation.  Now  relax  everything.  Your  voice  is  again 
silent and you are sound asleep. Sound, sound asleep, and 
you will sleep until I tell you. Then you will awaken quietly 
and  easily ... until  then,  just  relax  everything and  sleep, 
sleep, sleep. 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
Sleep Walking 
Now in a moment you will stand up. I will help you. You 
will  remain asleep as you  stand  up,  as if  you  were in a 
dream.  You  have  seen  sleepwalkers.  Finding  it  easy  to 
stand up. Now I'm going to touch you, to help you. (Help 
client.)  Go  ahead,  stand  up.  Walk.  That's  right. You  are 
finding  it  easy  to  use  your  leg  muscles as  you  remain 
deeply  asleep. Standing  up. And  as  you  sit  down  (help 
client), go even more deeply asleep. You can sit down safely 
and comfortably. 
Relaxation. Now relax everything. Relax your legs. They 
are returning to normal, and you are sound asleep. Sound, 
sound asleep, and you will sleep until I tell you. Then you 
will  awaken  quietly  and  easily ...  until  then,  just  relax 
everything and sleep, sleep, sleep. 
Visual Hallucinations 
Now listen carefully. In a moment you're  going to awaken 
from the neck up only. Your mind can remain asleep, and 
your body can remain asleep, but just your head, with no 
recognition of  your body, can awaken from the neck  up. 
When you're  ready, just open your eyes. Open them now, 
and  remain deeply asleep. You  are still dreaming,  and  I 
want you to dream of  this tennis ball. Open your eyes and 
look at the tennis ball in my hand. What color is it? (Hold 
up hand  as  i f  holding  tennis  ball  in it. Toss  the  ball  up.  See  if 
client follows the ball.) Now I'm going to turn the ball a little 
bit so you can see the number on it. Once you've  got the 
color  and  the  number,  you  can close  your eyes,  staying 
deeply, deeply asleep. 
Relaxation. Now relax everything. Your eyes are returning 
to normal, and you are sound asleep. Sound, sound asleep, 
and you will sleep until I tell you. Then you will awaken 
quietly and easily.. . until then,  just relax everything and 
sleep, sleep, sleep. 
Progressive Test Induction  Based  on Estabrooks 
NOTE: For demonstration purposes, Full Body Catalepsy 
can  be  added  to  the  Progressive Test  Induction  at  this 
point. For  details, see the Appendix, page 188. Full Body 
Catalepsy is not included here in the text because extreme 
care  is  needed in  inducing it,  and  it  is  more commonly 
done  in  the  training  of  Hypnotherapists  than  in  actual 
therapy. 
Insert Post-Hypno tic Suggestions 
Now in a moment I am going to give your Unconscious 
Mind  some  suggestions,   which  I  would  like  your 
Conscious Mind to forget. Forgetting is normal and natu- 
ral. Forgetting is a normal, natural thing.. . you do it all the 
time. Why  would you  care what you  had for  lunch two 
weeks  ago,  on  Wednesday,  when  it  rained? You  simply 
forget it. I want you to forget consciously what I am about 
to tell you in just a moment. Somebody gives you a slip of 
paper  and  you  forget  about  it.  Where  did  it  go?  Who 
knows, who cares, just forget about it. Forgetting is a normal, 
natural thing. Now,  I would like to suggest that.. . . (Make 
suitable positive suggestions related to learning, the supplying of 
needed information by the Unconscious Mind, or a topic of  your 
choosing. At this point, the suggestions should be direct!) And I 
want  you  to  forget  my  suggestions  consciously  and 
remember them unconsciously.. . like  the  piece of  paper 
you've  forgotten about.. . like who cares what you had for 
lunch two weeks ago. It's  OK, forgetting's a normal, natu- 
ral thing. Forget what I just said. 
Clear the Test or Short-Term Suggestions 
Now with your eyes closed, stay deeply asleep for a little 
while longer. All suggestions I have given you about this 
trance and all related tests are now removed. All ongoing 
suggestions are  still  in  effect.  (The  client  can  differentiate 
between  the  two.  He  will  keep  your  post-hypnotic  suggestions 
and  let go of  trance test suggestions.) 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
Bring the Client out of  Trance 
Now  when  you  are  ready,  begin  to  come  back.  In  a 
moment, I am going to count backwards from 10 to 1, and 
I want you to awaken one tenth of  the way with each num- 
ber until you are fully awake. 10 ... 9.. . 8. .. etc. 
Practise this Progressive Test Induction with a partner until 
the talk flows smoothly and effortlessly for you. The induc- 
tion is a wonderful convincer for the client because it leads 
them to experience several levels of  hypnosis. Likewise, it 
is rewarding for the new Hypnotherapist to lead the client 
to those levels. 
Further Notes on Progressive Test Induction 
Some clients may want to whiz on by any desire to stand up or see 
a tennis ball, and go quickly as deep as the comatose state. Instead 
of  'playing silly hypnotic phenomena games,' they may want to go 
straight to experiencing a deep level of  trance. That is fine, as long 
as they are actualizing what they want in hypnosis. Erickson said 
that some clients cannot actualize arm levitation in deep trance 
because they are in a state where they don't care. 
The  optimum level of  trance for  making post-hypnotic sugges- 
tions varies with each client. You  may need to experiment with a 
client to find the level at which they respond best to suggestion. 
Erickson would give suggestions to some clients in light trance. 
He  would  tell  them  a  few  stories, sometimes without  doing  a 
formal induction, and they would miraculously change. The key is 
to establish communication with your client's Unconscious Mind, 
whether you are using the pendulum or deep trance. Be  cautious 
when you lead a client into deep trance. In some cases, if  the client 
is too deep,  they  may become unresponsive. If  your client goes 
into a comatose state, you are not going to get the responses you 
need from them. 
Progressive Test Induction  Based  on Estabrooks 
with  some  of   the  tests,  you  can  say,  "I'd  like  to  ask  your 
Unconscious Mind  to send energy to the parts of  the body that 
need energy for this process. Now begin to do this while you stay 
in a deep trance." 
The Progressive Test Induction contains a blend of  permissive and 
authoritarian approaches. I do not  recommend  a  purely  direct, 
authoritarian approach  unless you  have  a  client  who responds 
well to it, such as a person with military background or a strictly 
disciplined upbringing. You  can readily begin with a permissive 
approach and shade into a more authoritarian style as the client 
progresses   deeper   into   trance.. . .  At   deeper   levels   most 
Unconscious Minds respond well to authoritarian messages. 
The  principle  of   utilization,  most  closely  connected  with 
Erickson's  indirect, permissive style, is likewise effective with an 
authoritarian approach. Utilization can turn what might have been 
a distraction into a support for the trance induction. It is optimal 
to notice possible distractions before the client does. You  might 
then say, for example, "In a moment, you may hear a sound com- 
ing from outside the room. And you will know that someone is 
rushing to go somewhere. Perhaps some  time  in  your life,  you 
have rushed to go places. As you notice someone outside rushing 
to go somewhere, perhaps you will want to go more deeply inside. 
And  take  all  the  time  you  need,  to  go  even  deeper." Utilizing 
whatever happens outside will help you achieve a smooth, seam- 
less induction. Utilization is hypnosis in all its elegance. 
From  the  standpoint  of   therapy,  the  most  critical  part  of   the 
Progressive Test Induction is the insertion of  post-hypnotic sugges- 
tions at a deep level of  trance. The next chapter gives more detail on 
post-hypnotic suggestions and techniques for deepening trance. 
For  any of  the tests in the Progressive Test  Induction, the client 
needs to exert a certain amount of  energy. If  the client is so relaxed 
that they cannot do anything further and  you want to continue 
Chapter 15 
Deepening Techniques and 
Post-Hypnotic Suggestions 
Deepening Techniques and Post-Hypnotic  Suggestions 
For a post-hypnotic suggestion to take hold in the client's  Uncon- 
scious Mind and be forgotten consciously the client must be in a 
medium  to  deep  trance  when  the  suggestion  is  made.  The 
Progressive Test Induction in the previous chapter will take most 
clients to a fairly deep level, because any suggestions that success- 
fully produce trance phenomena will of  their own accord deepen 
the trance and increase the client's  responsiveness. Each succes- 
sive trance phenomenon acts as a convincer. 
Deepening Techniques 
Whatever style of  induction you are using, there are several tech- 
niques  that  will  assist  you  in  leading  your  client  deeper  into 
trance. The first is direct or indirect suggestion. 
Your suggestion may be connected with a physical cue: "Each time 
I touch your forehead, notice that you can go even deeper. (Touch 
forehead.) Go even deeper now." Or it may be connected with the 
client's  own physiology: "With every breath you take,  you  may 
find a sense of  the deepening relaxation that can take you deeper 
into trance." 
Your suggestion can take the form of  a deepening image: "Can you 
imagine walking down a long stairway, going ten floors down, 
with ten steps for each floor,  and as you  do,  go deep in trance. 
With each step you take, go deeper. Step I... 2... 3... 4... 5... 6... 
7.. . 8.. . 9.. . 10.. . and now you are at the first landing on your way 
down ... deep down. And now again, Step  1... 2... etc." To  take 
your client down in comfort and style, you could decide to use an 
escalator or an elevator. 
In Chapter 13, we discussed using embedded metaphors to lead a 
client  into  trance.  Embedded  metaphors  can  also  be  used  to 
deepen  a  trance  that  has  already  begun.  The  more  levels  of 
metaphor you embed, the deeper the trance will become. (There 
seems to be a point of diminishing returns after 12 or so embedded 
metaphors.) 
The most profound way to deepen trance is by repeated induc- 
tion.  In  very  early  research  on  hypnotism  in  the  late  1 9 0 0 s ,  
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
Hippolyte Bernheim found  that when a client reached a certain 
level of  trance during the first visit,  they would go  to a deeper 
level when they came back the next week, and a still deeper level 
during the third visit (Suggestive Therapeutics,  1889). His observa- 
tion was that the more often a client was hypnotized, the deeper 
they would go. 
Erickson and Elman later pointed out that the repeated inductions 
do not need to be spread over a series of  separate sessions. Within 
one session,  they could  lead  the client  to  a  very deep level  by 
taking them into and out of  trance repeatedly, achieving a deeper 
level each time. The process of  achieving deeper levels through 
repeated inductions is calledfiactionation. 
Live Demonstration of  Deepening Techniques 
As  an example of  fractionation, here is a transcript of  part of  a 
demonstration I did in a class on hypnosis. In addition to the use 
of  repeated inductions for deepening, notice my utilization of  the 
subject's responses. 
(Chris comes  to front  of  room  in  response  to  a  gesture  that 
installed earlier as the trigger for a post-hypnotic suggestion to 
do  that. Current  theory  holds  that  when a  post-hypnotic  sug- 
gestion  activates,  a client  goes  back  into the  same  trance they 
were in when the suggestion was made.) 
Tad:     Have a seat please, Chris. Are you in a trance right 
now? 
Chris:  I don't know. 
Tad:    That's  right, you don't  know. Good. Not knowing 
is a good thing in hypnosis; you know that, don't 
you? Why don't you close your eyes, if  you'd  like, 
and go  really, really deeply in  trance. You  know 
how to do this, just go really deeply in trance. Just 
go very, very deeply asleep. Deeper and deeper in 
trance, just go even deeper. In a moment, Chris, 
Deepening Techniques and  Post-Hypnotic Suggestions 
I'm going to  touch you  on  the shoulder. When I 
touch  you  on  the shoulder, I would  like  you  to 
double your relaxation.. .when I touch you on the 
shoulder  (touching), right  now.  OK,  that's  good. 
Now go even deeper, Chris. I am going to ask you 
once again to double your relaxation, when I touch 
you on the shoulder.. .right now. Just double your 
relaxation, go even deeper, go even deeper.. . . OK, 
Chris, remembering where you are, why don't  you 
come on back. Good, now you're back. 
(Taking Chris  back  into trance again.)  Now  I  would 
like you to go right back to where you were, and 
double  your  relaxation  from  there.  Just  double 
your relaxation and go even deeper. That's  right. 
Even more deeply asleep. 
OK,  Chris,  once  again  open  your  eyes,  please. 
You're  doing great. Are you in a trance now? 
Chris: I don't know. 
Tad:     Not knowing is perfect, you know? 
Chris: Well.. . I think so. 
Tad:     You  do  think  so.  Let  me  ask  you  something. 
(Referring to visual hallucination  step in earlier induc- 
tion.)  Before when I showed you  the  tennis ball, 
what color was it? 
Chris:  I didn't see it. 
Tad:     You didn't see it. Would you like to see it? 
Chris:  Yes, I would. 
Tad:     You  would like to. So let's  ask your Unconscious 
Mind  to  assist you  in  developing whatever  you 
need  to develop to be able to see the tennis ball. 
This time when you close your eyes and go deeply 
asleep.. . and I will assist you by touching you on 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
the shoulder and you can double your relaxation 
again from where you were. Then I would like you 
to  ask  your  Unconscious  Mind  to  just  develop 
whatever  inner  mechanisms  or  imagination  you 
need, so  that you  can see something. And  if  you 
don't see it clearly the first time, then perhaps you 
could see what you would  see, if  you could see it. 
You  see? Good. Just go ahead and close your eyes 
and go even more deeply asleep, good. Just go very 
deeply  asleep,  that's  right.  Deeper  now,  deeper, 
just relax every single muscle. Double your relax- 
ation again, double it again, and go even deeper. 
Chris, I'd  like you to make sure that the muscles 
around  your  eyes  are  so  relaxed  that  you  can't 
open  them.  And  when  you  know  they  are,  go 
ahead  and  test  them,  and  notice  how  they  stay 
totally closed. Good. Remaining deeply asleep, I'd 
like to borrow both your hands for a moment. I am 
just going to simply see what happens if  we  just 
(setting hands in  motion). . . that's  right. Remaining 
deeply asleep, let your hands remain doing what- 
ever they are doing right now. (Chris's hands are now 
automatically  rotating.)  Good,  Chris,  relax  those 
hands. I'd  like you  to remain deeply asleep. You 
can awaken by  opening  your eyes and  not  your 
body. Your  Conscious Mind  can stay asleep, and 
your Unconscious Mind can awaken from the neck 
up. When you open your eyes, I am going to pick 
up  this  tennis  ball  from  the  floor.  I  am  actually 
going to show you ... mmmmm... the tennis ball. 
Go  ahead and  open your eyes,  and  take a peek. 
What color is that? 
Chris:  I can't  see it. 
Tad:     That's  fine,  just  close  your  eyes  and  fall  deeply 
asleep. Double your relaxation again. Now just ask 
your Unconscious Mind what needs to happen so 
that you can see the tennis ball,  just go ahead and 
do that now. And let your Unconscious Mind make 
Deepening Techniques and  Post-Hypnotic Suggestions 
the necessary connections for you to be able to see. 
(After  a  pause) OK,  Chris,  ask  your  Unconscious 
Mind if  it has made the necessary connections in 
your neurology so that you are ready to proceed. 
When  you  are  ready  open your eyes and  notice 
this  tennis ball. See  what  you  could  see,  if  you 
could see it. That is the first step. Good, what color 
is the ball? 
Chris:  Orange. 
Tad:     Excellent, very good. What's  the number on the 
ball? 
Chris:  3. 
Tad:     I am going to toss the tennis ball over to your chair 
and you can keep it, if  you'd  like. I'll  just throw it 
over there now,... Good,  Chris .... Go  ahead  and 
close your eyes and double your relaxation once 
more, go even deeper. 
In  this  demonstration,  I  asked  Chris  to  develop  the  necessary 
faculties to  have  a  positive hallucination. If  the  client  has  not 
produced  a hypnotic phenomenon that we  are looking for  at a 
deeper level, we can assist them in doing that. Having the client go 
in and out of  trance is perfect. While they are in trance, we can give 
them suggestions to modify their neurology, or to have whatever 
changes are needed occur inside, so that they will be able to actu- 
alize a phenomenon that previously they could not. 
Some people need extra work on their neurological connections to 
be able to positively hallucinate an object. Others can do this very 
readily. These people have a skill common to architects. Architects 
get paid for their hallucinations. They earn six-figure incomes for 
hallucinating buildings where there are none. 
A person who can hallucinate a tennis ball can visualize the heal- 
ing of  a diseased part of their body. Chris learned something very 
valuable in the demonstration. He went through the first stages of 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
teaching  himself  how  to  positively hallucinate something. This 
will serve him very well in the future in terms of  imagining his 
body healing itself and being whole. 
Techniques for Making Post-Hypnotic Suggestions 
Post-hypnotic  suggestions are  imperative  to  successful  change 
work in hypnosis. A post-hypnotic suggestion is a suggestion that 
activates and operates at a time.. . or times.. . after the client has 
come  out  of  trance. Typically  the  client  will  feel  a  compelling 
desire to respond, often without remembering or  realizing what 
has prompted the desire. 
To  make your post-hypnotic suggestions effective, remember the 
following points: 
Lead  the client into medium to  deep trance  in order  to 
produce  amnesia  for  the  suggestion,  which  is  usually 
desirable  so  that  the  Conscious Mind  will  not  interfere 
with  the  working of  the  suggestion.  (In some  cases  the 
post-hypnotic  suggestion  can  work  even  if   the  client 
remembers it. Some people later remember  a suggestion 
when  they  are  in  trance  and  not  when  they  are  out  of 
trance.) 
0 
Any suggestions given while the client is in deep trance 
should be clear and to the point. Early in the induction, 
while the client is in a waking state, indirect suggestions 
are effective. Later, when the client is in deep trance, make 
your  post-hypnotic suggestions direct and  authoritarian. 
(This was pointed out by Boris Sidis in The  Psychology of 
Suggestion, 1898.) 
Keep your talk congruent with what you are really think- 
ing. The Unconscious Mind is amazingly perceptive, and 
can  readily  detect  incongruities  between  what  you  are 
telling  it  and  the  messages  given  by  your  voice  and 
physiology. Think what you want the client to do as you 
are asking them to do it. Remember, your client will only 
actualize those things that you believe to be true. 
Deepening Techniques  and Post-Hypnotic Suggestions 
Embed the suggestion in multiple metaphors. This tech- 
nique is distinctly Ericksonian. Remember the metaphors 
in the Progressive Test Induction: "Now in a moment I am 
going to give your Unconscious Mind some suggestions, 
which  I  would  like  your  Conscious  Mind  to  forget. 
Forgetting is normal and natural. Forgetting is a normal, 
natural thing.. . you do it all the time. Why would you care 
what you  had  for  lunch two weeks ago,  on Wednesday 
when it rained? You  simply forget it. I want you to forget 
consciously what I am about to tell you in just a moment. 
Somebody gives you a slip of paper and you forget about 
it. Where did  it  go? Who  knows,  who  cares,  just  forget 
about  it.  Forgetting  is  a  normal,  natural  thing.  Now,  I 
would like to suggest that.. .." 
Tell the client what the trigger will be to set off  the acti- 
vation  of   the  post-hypnotic suggestion. If   I  myself  am 
going to trigger activation of  a suggestion during a class- 
room demonstration, I tell the subject that when they see 
me rub my hand across my upper lip, they will, for exam- 
ple, walk up to the front of  the room. 
Tell the client clearly what to do. Example: "You  will feel 
an undeniable urge to stand up, and you will stand up and 
walk to the front of  the room." Then tell the client when to 
do it. Example: "You  will do this immediately." 
Close the metaphor loops: "And I want you to forget my 
suggestions consciously and remember them unconscious- 
ly.. . like the piece of  paper you've  forgotten about.. . like 
who cares what you had for lunch two weeks ago. It's OK, 
forgetting is  a  normal,  natural  thing.  Forget  what  I  just 
said." 
In stage hypnosis and classroom  demonstrations, post-hypnotic 
suggestions are designed to be activated  just after the client has 
come out of trance, by the signal the hypnotist has set as a trigger. 
In  therapy,  post-hypnotic suggestions  are  set  to  be  activated 
repeatedly over a long period, sometimes in response to an exter- 
nal trigger, or very often in response to some internal trigger in the 
client's own behavior. 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
Here is an example of suggestions that you might make to a col- 
league in practising post-hypnotic suggestions for the purpose of 
therapy: 
I know that you want to be an excellent Hypnotherapist. 
And now I want to ask your Unconscious Mind to organ- 
ize everything that you've been studying, everything that 
you've  heard experienced Hypnotherapists say all of  the 
examples of  things to  say  to  your  clients. And  you  can 
remember those things, and your Unconscious Mind can 
present them to your Conscious Mind in such a way that 
you don't even have to think about them. 
When you are listening to a client, your complete attention 
will be on what the client is saying, riveted, because you 
know  that  when  it  is  time  for  you  to  respond,  your 
Unconscious Mind will immediately supply the response 
that will most help the client. 
And when you are talking to a client and searching for the 
next thing to say, you will relax and pause quietly, because 
you  know  that your Unconscious Mind is about to give 
you  the best  thing to  say. Just relax. Your  Unconscious 
Mind  will  organize everything you  have  learned  about 
hypnosis and will easily and effortlessly supply the things 
that you need to say in order to have your clients go into 
deep trance and experience the most excellent results from 
the hypnotherapy process. 
That would be all right, wouldn't it? Just nod "Yes" when 
your Unconscious Mind has organized all your learnings 
about hypnosis. That's  right. Excellent. 
Chapter 16 
Elman Methods 
Post-hypnotic suggestions can last for as short or as long a time as 
you suggest. You  can specify that a suggestion will last only for a 
single occasion. You can make a deeply beneficial suggestion that 
will last forever. 
Elman Methods 
Dave Elman was one of  the first people to propose that all hypno- 
sis is self  hypnosis. In his book Hypnotherapy in 1964, Elman said, 
"I  have  been  teaching  hypnosis ...  for  years,  and  have 
found  that  many  [people] seem  to  think  that  they  can 
become  expert  hypnotists  after  a  few  classroom  and 
practice sessions. Since there is really no such thing as a 
hypnotist, this is obviously impossible. As a practitioner 
employing this tool, all you can ever do is show a patient 
how  to  go  over  the  hurdle from  a  normal  waking  or 
sleeping state into that peculiar state of  mind known as 
hypnosis. You won't hypnotize them; they will hypnotize 
themselves. This  means that all of  us using suggestion 
wield no 'power'  over any subject. It means that there is 
nothing that I can do that you can't learn to do in hypnosis." 
Elman was born in Fargo, North Dakota in 1890. His father did stage 
hypnosis and owned a general store in North Dakota, where he kept 
a  collection of  books  on  hypnosis.  Dave  Elman  mastered  these 
books. He learned hypnosis so well that he had to drop it for a while 
when he went off  to school, because it scared some of  his classmates. 
In his later years Elman taught hypnosis to medical doctors. 
Dave Elman proposed a model of  hypnosis that was clearly dif- 
ferent from earlier models. In watching his father perform, Elman 
noticed that a stage hypnotist had to put people in trance a lot 
more quickly  than a Hypnotherapist, in the interests of  show- 
manship. He was fascinated by the ability of  a stage hypnotist to 
hypnotize a large group in a short time. And the trances his father 
induced were deep enough to produce hypnotic phenomena very 
quickly. Elman developed 
duce a deep trance as qui 
To  better understand what is different about Elman's  method, let 
us compare it with other methods we have discussed. Traditional 
hypnosis is  generally authoritarian, using a direct  induction to 
achieve a sleeping trance. Ericksonian hypnosis is permissive and 
indirect, leading more often to  waking  trance  than  to  sleeping. 
Neuro Linguistic Programming interventions (which are a strong 
resource for a hypnotherapist) are authoritarian and indirect, with 
the client almost always in a waking state. 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
Elman Methods 
Elman techniques do not fit any of  these models. His inductions 
could be authoritarian or permissive, direct or indirect, leading to 
waking  or  sleeping  trance! The  chart  below  summarizes these 
differences. 
I 
Type of Hypnosis 
Traditional 
Ericksonian 
~NLP  Intervention 
Elman's Hypnosis 
Approach to Client   Style of Induction      Type of Trance 1 
Authoritarian 
Direct 
Sleeping 
I 
Authoritarian 
I 
Indirect 
I 
Waking 
Permissive 
Waking or 
Sleeping 
Indirect 
Authoritarian or 
Permissive 
The greatest defining characteristic of  Elman's technique is that it 
induces trance almost instantaneously by setting up a dissociation 
between the Conscious and Unconscious Minds. The hypnotist is 
thus able to speak more directly with the Unconscious Mind, with 
minimal filtering by the Conscious. In Elman hypnosis, the thera- 
pist  says,  "Close  your  eyes  and  pretend  you  can't  open  them, 
knowing full well that you can." According to Elman, creating that 
paradox  at  once  sets up the conditions in  which  hypnosis  can 
occur. 
Waking or 
Sleeping 
Direct or 
Indirect 
Elman's  second  principal innovation was  to  give  the client  the 
responsibility for  going  into  trance.  He  said,  "When  a  person 
rejects  hypnosis,  it  simply  means  he  has  refused  to  bypass  his 
critical faculty and [so has made] the implanting of  selective thinking 
impossible. It doesn't mean he can't be hypnotized or won't be hyp- 
notized, but simply that he refused to follow instructions. If  he 
does follow properly given instructions, hypnosis is possible for 
him just as it is for everyone." (Italics added.) 
In other words, the percentage of  people who can be hypnotized is 
one hundred per cent. Elman says that everyone can be hypno- 
tized and everyone can achieve a deep level of  trance easily, if  they 
follow instructions. 
Elman also had a resourceful approach to obtaining eye closure: 
"Practically all textbooks declare that you must first obtain 
eye closure if you wish to obtain hypnosis, and that eye 
closure can usually be obtained by the methods called fix- 
ation,  monotony,  rhythm, imitation  or  levitation. I will 
obtain eye  closure  without  these methods. 'Close  your 
eyes and pretend you can't  open them. Keep on pretend- 
ing, and while you are pretending, try to open your eyes.' 
You'll  find that it is impossible, if  you are concentrating 
hard on the pretence. Now you know very well that you 
can open your eyes any time that you change your mind 
and stop pretending. All  the time you  were  pretending 
that you could  not open your eyes, your sense of  judg- 
ment was completely suspended concerning that particu- 
lar action. We  obtained the same eye closure we would if 
we  used  the  techniques of  fixation, monotony, rhythm, 
imitation, or levitation. This can be done instantaneously." 
Elman continues: 
"But does it mean that you are hypnotized? Indeed it does 
not. It is merely the entering wedge and hypnosis is not 
obtained  until  selective  thinking  is  firmly  established. 
Selective thinking is whatever you believe wholeheartedly. 
For example, if  you are led to believe that you will feel no 
pain, and you believe it completely, you will feel no pain. 
Let the slightest doubt come in and the selective thinking 
vanishes; the critical faculty is no longer bypassed.. . . The 
introduction  of   fear  causes  a  defensive  reaction  that 
brings the critical faculty back into focus." 
Elman's Stages of Hypnosis 
In Chapter 8,  we discussed LeCron's six stages of  hypnosis, rang- 
ing over a continuum of  light, medium and deep trance. Elman 
offers a simpler scheme of  four levels of  trance: 
Light or superficial trance 
Somnambulistic trance 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
Coma 
Hypnosis attached to sleep. 
Conditions for Hypnosis, and Pre-Talk 
Dave Elman specifies four prerequisites for a successful induction. 
First, in order for hypnosis to occur, the subject must 
agree to be hypnotized. 
Second, there must be communication between the 
Hypnotherapist and the client. 
Third, the client must be free from any fear about the 
hypnotic process or what is going to take place. 
And finally, the client must be free from reluctance. The 
client must trust the Hypnotherapist and their intentions. 
The pre-talk ought to set up these conditions. From Elman's point 
of  view, much of  the work of  hypnosis occurs before the induction. 
We  need to eliminate the client's fears and misconceptions. Here is 
a sample of  pre-talk in the Elman style: 
Elman Pre-Talk 
Make a fist. Relax. 
You  know that if  you wanted to, you could tighten your 
muscles  and  make  a  fist  that  was  so  strong  that  you 
couldn't  make it any stronger or any more powerful. Isn't 
that true? So,  if  you wanted, and if  you knew how,  you 
could  also  make  any  group  of  muscles you  wanted  so 
absolutely, totally  relaxed  that  unless  you  removed  the 
relaxation,  you  could  relax  those  muscles  to  the  point 
where they wouldn't work. That is also true, isn't it? 
p~ 
Eyelids are the easiest to relax. 
The easiest muscles in your entire body to relax are your 
eyelids. Now, you know that's true, don't you? Remember 
a time when you were  tired,  had a rough day, and you 
closed your eyes, and it just feels so good. 
"Now,  watch  what  I  do." (Demonstrate this  to  the  client 
while you are talking.) 
I'm going to close my eyes, and I am going to relax them 
so completely and so deeply that if  I do not take that relax- 
ation away they won't  work. Nothing that I can do or say 
or think will make them open. Now I can take away the 
relaxation and  they  will open instantly, but if  the relax- 
ation is there, they won't  work. 
"Now I'm  going to try to open my eyes." (Open eyes.) 
Now I tested myself  to see that they did work, and I did 
the wrong thing, because I wanted to test them to be sure 
they do not work. 
"This time I am going to keep them shut." 
This time I am going to relax my eyelids to the point where 
they won't  work. And I am going to hold on to the relax- 
ation and then test them to make sure they do not work. I 
don't  have to prove they will work, I can do that every 
day. I know that I can instantly remove the relaxation by 
the slightest thought, the slightest desire, so I am not going 
to do that this time. This time I'm going to allow them to 
stay, totally relaxed, and I know that as long as I stay total- 
ly  relaxed, and  as long as I  do not  take  that  relaxation 
away, nothing I can do or say or think will cause them to 
open. Watch. See, they stay there like an old shoe. And I 
know  it  looks  stupid  with  my  eyebrows going  up  and 
down, but it feels great! 
Hypnosis:  A Comprehensive Guide 
'You can do it too!" 
Vow, I can feel proud of  myself, because I did it. I can take 
:he relaxation away and I can open my eyes. You know, 5- 
!ear-old   kids can do this; you can do this, too. Just see if 
OU    can  do  what  I  do. Close  your eyes,  and  put  your 
lwareness on your eyelids. You're in charge, you're in con- 
roll and your muscles have to do what you tell them to 
llo. 
"They respond to what you tell them." 
Not what I tell them to do.. . they respond to you, not me. 
Your  eyelids respond to you because the suggestions are 
coming  directly  from you,  and  through your neurology. 
You  direct your body to follow those suggestions totally 
and completely, and you will be successful. 
Have the client do it. 
So,  go ahead, tell your body to relax your eyelid muscles 
totally  and  completely, so  deeply  and  completely  that 
unless you  remove the relaxation, they  just  won't  work. 
And  when  you  know  that you  have accomplished  this, 
then hold on to the relaxation and give them a good test, 
and notice that they stay shut; make sure they won't work, 
and notice how good that feels. Test them hard, really try. 
( I f  client opens eyes:) Congratulations; now prove you can 
relax them so they won't  work. 
Conclusion 
That was the hardest step. You did just great. 
Take turns practising this pre-talk with a partner until it flows nat- 
urally and smoothly. 
Elman Methods 
Elman Induction No. 1 
An  Elman induction is a fast, simple progressive test induction, 
with steps different from the one in Chapter 14. Typically there are 
six steps for leading the client into deep trance: 
Deep Breath / Close the Eyes 
a       Relax the Eyes 
Let the relaxation flow through the whole body 
Open and close the eyes. (Assist using  two fingers.  Achieve 
fvactionation  by repeating.) 
Test for physical relaxation 
Mental relaxation 
If  the client does not succeed at a certain level, you re-do that level 
before going on to the next. 
Like  Erickson, Elman  focused  on  paying attention  to every detail of  a 
client's  physical reactions. "True hypnotic signs cannot be aped, 
imitated  or  pretended. For  example,  you  cannot  pretend  body 
warmth. It has to be there. You  cannot imitate fluttering eyelids. 
Try it for yourself and notice how after a second or two the eyelids 
no longer flutter. In hypnosis, the fluttering eyelids occur almost 
constantly as the induction proceeds. There are very few people 
who can, at will, cause their eyes to tear, nor can you at will cause 
the whites of  your eyes to redden.. . ." 
The  best  way  to  master  the  Elman  induction  is  to  take  turns 
practising it with a partner. For learning purposes, detailed expla- 
nations accompany some of  the steps of  the induction below. (For 
later quick reference, the induction is duplicated in the Appendix 
without explanations.) 
When acting as the Hypnotherapist, pay attention to everything 
the client does, and utilize. Any time they do something that seems 
like trance behavior, say, "That's  right." 
Be sure that the client follows your instructions exactly. One of  the 
beauties of the Elman Induction is that it conditions  responsiveness 
to suggestions. For example, if the client gets ahead of  you by clos- 
ing their eyes before you tell them to,  they are anticipating  your 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
suggestions rather than responding to them. This will slow down 
the induction, making the client less responsive to your sugges- 
tions once they are in trance. If  the client does something before 
you instruct them to, go back and repeat, making sure they follow 
your instructions. 
-- 
3lman Induction No. 1 
rake a long, deep breath and hold it for a few seconds. 
(Reminder: if  the client closes their eyes when you 
say, "Take a deep breath," stop the induction and 
restart. The client needs to do what you say when 
you say it.) 
Ynd  as you exhale this breath, allow your eyes to close 
Start with your hand above the client's eyes and bring it 
iown to below the chin as the client's  eyes are closing), 
ind let go of  the surface tension in your body. Just let 
your body relax as much as possible, right now. 
Vow  place  your  awareness  on  your  eye  muscles,  and 
relax the muscles around your eyes to the point where 
they  just  won't  work.  When  you're   sure  they're  so 
relaxed that as long as you hold on to this relaxation they 
won't  work, hold on to that relaxation and test them to 
make sure THEY WON'T  WORK. 
(There are three possibilities: 
If  the client tests and succeeds at  keeping 
their eyes closed, go on to the next step. 
If  they  open  their  eyes,  say,  "Good,  now 
you've  proved  you  can  open  your  eyes, 
you've  proved you're  in charge. You  oper 
your eyes every day. Now,  prove that  you 
can  relax  your  eyes  so  much  that  they'll 
stay closed." 
If  the client  just sits there and doesn't  tes 
their eyes,  repeat this step; you  are condi 
tioning  them  to  respond  to  your  sugges 
tions.) 
Elman Methods 
Now,  this relaxation you have in your eyes is the same 
quality of  relaxation that I want you to have throughout 
your whole body. So let this quality of  relaxation flow 
through your whole body from the top of  your head to 
the tips of  your toes. 
(Look for signs of  the client becoming much more 
relaxed as they do this next step.) 
(Each time you  tell  the client  to close  their eyes, 
pass two fingers in front of  their face,  downward 
from the forehead to the chin.) 
Now  we  can  deepen  this  relaxation  much  more.  In  a 
moment I'm  going to have you open and close your eyes. 
When you close your eyes, that's  your signal to let this 
feeling of  relaxation become ten times deeper. All you 
have  to do is want it to happen,  and  you  can  make it 
happen very easily. OK, now, open your eyes. Now close 
your eyes (Pass fingers) and feel that relaxation flowing 
through your entire body, taking you much deeper. Use 
your  wonderful  imagination and  imagine  your  whole 
body  is  covered  and  wrapped  in  a  warm  blanket  of 
relaxation. 
(Again) 
Now  we  can  deepen  that  relaxation  much  more.  In  a 
moment, I'm  going to have you open and close your eyes 
and double the relaxation you have now. Make it become 
twice as deep.  Once more now,  open  your  eyes.  Close 
your  eyes  (Pass fingers) and  double  your  relaxation ... 
good. Let every muscle in your body become so relaxed 
that as long as you hold on to this quality of  relaxation, 
every muscle of  your body is totally relaxed. 
(You are using fractionation to deepen the client's 
level of  trance. Repeat the eye openings and clos- 
ings until he looks as if  you will have to catch him 
from falling off  the chair.) 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
In a moment, I'm  going to have you open and close your 
eyes once more. Again, when you close your eyes, dou- 
ble the relaxation you now have. Make it twice as deep. 
Once more, open your eyes.. . close your eyes and double 
your relaxation ... good. Let every muscle in your body 
become so relaxed  that as long as you  hold  on to this 
, 
quality of  relaxation, every muscle of  your body is totally 
In  a  moment  (Elman always  tells  the  client  what  he's 
going to do before he does it) I'm  going to lift your (right 
or left) hand by the wrist just a few inches, and drop it. 
If  you have followed  my instructions up to this point, 
that hand will be so relaxed it will be  just as loose and 
limp as a wet dish cloth. It will simply plop down. Now, 
don't  try to help me ... y ou have to remove the realization 
and let me do all the lifting, so that when I release your 
hand, it just plops down and you'll  allow yourself to go 
much deeper. (Lifting hand) Now the moment your hand 
plops down  on your  leg,  it  will  send  an  even  deeper 
relaxation through your whole body. 
(Some  clients  are  preconditioned  to  do  arm 
catalepsy when you lift their hand. That's not what 
you're looking for, so you may have to talk them 
through that. If  the client helps to lift their hand, 
say, "Let me do all the lifting, don't help me. Let it 
be heavy. Don't  help me.") 
Now,  that's  complete physical relaxation. I want you to 
know there are  two  ways a  person  can  relax.  You  can 
relax  physically  and  you  can  relax  mentally.  You've 
already proved that you can relax physically. Now let me 
show you how to relax mentally. 
In a moment, I'll  ask you to begin slowly counting back- 
wards out loud from 100. Now, here's  the secret to mental 
relaxation.  With  each  number  you  say,  double  your 
mental relaxation. With each number you say, let your 
Elman Methods 
mind become twice as relaxed. Now, if you do this by the 
time you  reach  the number 98,  or maybe even sooner, 
your mind will have become so relaxed, you will have 
actually relaxed all the rest of  the numbers that would 
have come after 98,  right out of  your  mind.  And  there 
just won't  be any more numbers.  Now,  you have to do 
this; I can't  do it for you. Those numbers will leave if you 
will them away.  Now start with the idea that you will 
make that happen and you can easily dispel them from 
your mind. Want it to happen. Will it to happen. Make it 
happen. Now, say the first number, 100, and double your 
mental relaxation. (Client: "100")  Deeper relaxed. (Wait 
for client to say number.) Now, double that mental relax- 
ation and let those  numbers already start to fade ... 99. 
(Client: "99") Deeper relaxed. (Wait for client to say num- 
ber.) Double your mental relaxation. Start to make those 
numbers leave. They'll  go if  you will them away. (Client: 
"98") Deeper relaxed. Now they'll  be gone. Dispel them. 
Banish them. Make it happen, you can do it, I can't  do it 
for you. Put them out. ARE THEY ALL GONE? 
(Usually, the numbers disappear by 98; I've never 
had a client go past 96. It is your choice whether to 
prompt the client by saying the number.) 
Insert suggestions. 
Bring client out of  trance. 
The number block achieved in Step 6 is a sign that the client is in the 
same state you get  into just before falling asleep. This is Elman's 
fourth trance level: somnambulism. If  you question the client as they 
are going through the numbers, 100.. . 99.. . 98,  they will tell you 
there is a moment when their mind is completely blank. According 
to Elman, this is when you know that the client has reached full men- 
tal relaxation. From a Zen point of  view, this is the 'no mind' state, or 
the void. Leading the client to this state is Elman's objective in doing 
the numbers. To  know that your client has reached this     state, you 
must ask, "Are they [the numbers] all gone?" 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
An  Ericksonian  induction  is  subtle,  gentle,  and  effective. The 
Progressive Test  Induction leads to  a  particularly  deep level of 
trance. The Elman Induction will result in a trance that is reason- 
ably  deep and  reasonably  quick,  and  is  particularly  good  as  a 
second induction for a client you have already hypnotized before. 
It is also a great deal of  fun! In order to meet the diverse needs of 
your clients, it is useful for you to have several different ways of 
inducing trance. 
Elman Induction No. 2 
In a moment, you will be examining a second version of  the Elman 
Induction, which  follows the same steps as  the first but moves 
more quickly. This second induction works well with a client who 
has gone through the first induction previously, or has done some 
trance work before. You  might even switch to this second induc- 
tion if  you notice part way through the first induction that you do 
not seem to be moving fast enough for the client. 
After  you and your  partner have become comfortable with the 
first Elman induction, practise this second induction together and 
notice the change of  rhythm as the client becomes more used to 
going into trance. In case the client is moving more slowly than the 
script, add some of  the words from the first Elman induction back 
in. 
Elman Induction No. 2 
Take a long, deep breath and close your eyes. 
(Start with your hand above the client's  eyes and 
bring it down to below the chin.) 
Now  relax  the  muscles around  your eyes  to  the  point 
where  they won't  work ... and  pretend  you can't  open 
them even though you know full well that you can. As 
, 
long as you hold on to this relaxation, you can pretend 
they  just  won't   work.  When  you're   sure  they're  so 
relaxed that they just won't  work, continue to pretend 
Elman Methods 
that they won't  work and test them to make sure THEY 
WON'T  WORK. Test them hard ... that's  right. 
Now let the feeling of  relaxation go right down to your 
toes. 
(Assist, using two fingers.) 
Now  open  your  eyes
-really relax-close your eyes 
again ... that's  it ... The next time you do this, you'll  be 
able to relax even more than you relaxed before. 
Open your eyes.. . now  close  your eyes ... double  the 
relaxation.  Open  your  eyes ... now  close your eyes ... 
double the relaxation. 
Now I'm going to lift your hand and drop it. I want it to 
be as limp as a dishrag.  Now the moment your hand 
plops down on your leg,  it will send an even deeper 
relaxation through your whole body. That's  right. 
We  want your mind to be as relaxed as your body is, so 
I want you to start counting from 100 backwards when 
I tell you to. Each time you say a number, double your 
mental relaxation. With each number you say, let your 
mind  become  twice  as  relaxed.  By  the  time  you  get 
down to 98, you'll  be so relaxed the numbers won't  be 
there. Start from 100 and watch them disappear before 
you  get  to  98 ... double  your  mental  relaxation  and 
watch  them  start  fading ... Now  watch  them  disap- 
pear.. .. Now they'll  be gone.. .. Isn't  that a nice feeling? 
Are  they all gone? Let them disappear .... Are they all 
gone? That's  right.. .. 
Insert suggestions. 
Bring client out of  trance. 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
1 
After  you  have  taken  turns  with  your  partner  doing  Elman 
Induction No.2, compare notes on which version of  Elman each of 
you preferred as Hypnotherapist and as client. Preferences differ. 
In the beginning, many Hypnotherapists feel more confident with 
No. 1 because it allows careful preparation of  each step and gives 
the Hypnotherapist more time to gather their thoughts and pro- 
ceed smoothly. On the other hand, a client who is used to a fast 
pace or  can  go into a  trance quickly may become distracted  by 
their own impatience with Induction No. 1. I was once moving at 
a normal adult speed with an 8-year-old client, who peeked over 
I 
at me and said, "Would you hurry up!" 
Chapter 17 
Developing Your Induction Style 
Developing Your Induction Style 
I again recommend that you  practice the Elman Pre-talk and  Inductions 
with a  partner until  you  are doing  them smoothly with very little need 
for the scripts. As you continue to  practise, this chapter will offer refine- 
ments that can bring  you better and  better results. 
To begin with, be sure you have a comfortable chair for the client, 
one that is more substantial than an ordinary straight-back chair. If 
the client feels that they might fall off  the chair while in trance, this 
fear could keep them from readily going into trance. When you're 
doing hypnotherapy on a regular basis, you may want to invest in 
a special chair.. . sometimes clients do very well in a recliner. 
At the beginning of  your conversation with the client and during 
the Pre-talk, begin building rapport by matching their posture and 
movements. If  the client is sitting with their  legs crossed, cross 
yours too. If  they are leaning to one side a bit, lean at about the 
same angle. Without knowing why, the client is almost certain to 
feel comfortable and in rapport with you. 
You  may remember reaching a special level of  rapport in the sec- 
ond Ericksonian induction (Chapter 10) as the result of  matching 
the client's  breathing. This  attention to breathing can  magically 
increase rapport in an induction. Speak while the client is breath- 
ing out. When they breathe in, stop speaking and breathe in with 
them. You can quickly learn to speak smoothly while matching the 
client's  breathing. It  does not matter if  this makes you pause in 
mid-sentence. Matching the client's breathing will not slow down 
the induction; actually, it will lead you into a rhythm that intensi- 
fies rapport and deepens the client's  trance. 
Here are hints for more easily matching your client's breathing. If 
you sit straight across from the client looking directly at them, or 
if  they are wearing a jacket or heavy clothes, it may be difficult (or 
rude!) to observe their breathing. Instead, sit at about a 90-degree 
angle, and rather than looking at the client, focus your eyes on an 
object or a spot on the wall that will cause you to be looking a foot 
or two in front of them. You will actually be able to see the move- 
ment of their chest more clearly with your peripheral vision than 
you could by looking directly at them. This is because our periph- 
eral vision is designed to pick up motion. Sitting at an angle, you 
will also have the advantage that you can hold your script
-if you 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
Developing Your Induction Style 
are using one
-at about the level of the client's shoulder, and can 
easily alternate between glancing at your script and watching the 
client's  breathing in your peripheral vision, without needing to 
bob your head up and down. 
You can also observe breathing by listening. Most obviously, when 
the client is talking, they are breathing out. More subtly, as you 
pay close attention, you can often hear light sounds of  breathing. 
If  you notice that the client does not respond as well to matched 
breathing as  they  did  to an earlier induction without it,  by  all 
means omit this normally effective technique. 
In addition to noticing the client's  breathing, notice everything 
you can about their physiology and utilize what you see as you are 
making suggestions. If  you notice, for example, that the client is 
not fully relaxing their neck muscles, you could say, "You may feel 
that your neck muscles are not totally relaxing yet. And you can 
just let those relax too." 
As  you  begin an induction, speak  to the client with your head 
upright,  talking  at  a  level  with  the  client's  face.  As  the  client 
becomes more  and  more  relaxed  and  their  head begins  to  nod 
downwards, allow your own head to gradually move downwards 
as well. By  the time you get to the disappearing numbers step of 
the Elman Induction, you will be talking to the client's feet. 
When you act as the client, you will find that this change in the 
direction of  the Hypnotherapist's voice gives a distinct sensory 
shift. Your Unconscious Mind will follow the change of  direction, 
and your own physiology will adjust to match the Hypnothera- 
pist's physiology,  allowing you  to  absorb and  respond  to  their 
suggestions more powerfully. 
Pay close attention to the stages of  hypnosis. What you will notice 
is that over repeated inductions, each client's  physiology is pre- 
dictable  and  will  show  you  what  stage  has  been  reached. 
Generally, the eyelids begin to flutter early in light trance. After 
some time you'll notice increased wetness in the eyes. Then you'll 
observe the face becoming more symmetrical. And you'll  notice 
the breathing slowing down dramatically. Finally, you will begin 
to  notice  some  shifting in  the  angle  of  the  head.  Noticing  the 
client's  physiology  provides  feedback  that  will  allow  you  to 
expertly pace the induction. 
You  can bring the client out of  trance early in the session and ask 
them for feedback. First do a full induction, with some good post- 
hypnotic suggestions, including one that will make it very easy for 
them to get back into deep trance again. Then bring the client out. 
If  you  ask,  "So  how  did  that  go?" they  are  likely  to  tell  you 
whether the speed of  the induction was right for them, and what 
things you  did that helped the process.. . or didn't.  This will be 
essential feedback if  you are not sure what you observed, or if  you 
are still developing your observation skills. Then you can contin- 
ue the session, leading the client back into trance and adjusting 
your style according to their feedback. 
Be  open to experimenting. As you allow your Unconscious Mind 
to spontaneously supply ideas, especially in utilizing the client's 
responses, you will often be delighted with the effect on the client. 
I have said to clients, "As soon as your mind is totally blank, raise 
your finger to let me know," and they have been able to show me 
in this way when to go on to the next step. 
As the Hypnotherapist, you can allow yourself to go into a wak- 
ing  trance.  Erickson  frequently  said,  "It's  really  hard  to  resist 
someone in trance who's hypnotizing you." 
Chapter 18 
Conclusion 
Developing Your Induction Style 
In developing your overall approach as a  Hypnotherapist,  you 
will need to build your repertory of  inductions through study and 
practice, and to decide on the full range of  interventions that you 
want to master. I have found it most useful to combine hypnosis, 
Time-Line  Therapy@, and  Neuro-Linguistic  Programming. This 
combination  provides  three  complementary  avenues  to  the 
Unconscious Mind. 
Time-Line Therapy@ works well in assisting the client to overcome 
limitations rooted in their early life, or in doing any kind of  regres- 
sion work. Hypnosis is excellent for deep interventions, such as 
pain control or getting the body to change its responses. NLP is 
useful  for  changing  behaviors  more  at  a  surface  level.  So,  for 
example, if  a client has been referred to you by a medical doctor 
because they have not responded to the doctor's treatment of  their 
ulcers, you could first use Time-Line Therapy@ to go back and get 
rid of  the mental source of  the ulcers. Then,  using hypnosis, you 
could  talk to the client's  Unconscious Mind to get it to heal the 
body. And  if  the client loves a food  that seems to trigger ulcer 
attacks, you could use an NLP technique to make that food choice 
very  unattractive. I  often  use  all  three  methodologies  in  one 
session. 
You  do  not  usually  need  a  formal  induction  with  Time-Line 
Therapy@. The process of  working with the Time-Line itself is suf- 
ficient for inducing a light trance and releasing the mental causes 
of  most of  the client's  problems that you  will be  working with. 
Once you have a Time-Line Therapy@ intervention in progress, a 
deeper hypnotic induction is usually fast and easy. 
When Not to Use Hypnosis 
To offer 'the safest and most useful hypnotherapy for your clients, 
you  need  to  understand  the  scope  of   practice  suitable  for  a 
Hypnotherapist who is not licensed.  Unless you  are a  licensed 
psychologist, medical doctor, dentist, social worker, or marriage, 
family and child counsellor,  you should limit the scope of  your 
practice to stress reduction, performance enhancement, and habit 
control issues such as smoking and  weight loss.  If  you  have  a 
written  referral from  a  medical  doctor  or  you  are  working  in 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
cooperation with a psychiatrist or psychologist, it is appropriate to 
do additional kinds of  work. This is especially important in the 
United  States,  where  we  face  fairly  heavy  restrictions on  what 
Hypnotherapists can do. 
There are five instances in which hypnosis is specifically contra- 
indicated: 
First, when the client's personal history suggests that they 
may  be  dangerous to  themselves or  others,  the client  is 
beyond   the   scope   of    treatment   of    an   unlicensed 
Hypnotherapist. In most states of  the US, even a psycholo- 
gist, MFCC or MSW will refer a client who is dangerous to 
self or others to a psychiatrist or a medical doctor. 
Second,  if  the client is dealing  with highly  repressed or 
traumatic issues, you may want to refer them to someone 
who has been trained to deal with those issues. Hypnosis 
alone  may  not  be  a  sufficient  intervention.  Time-Line 
Therapy@ could be indicated; if  you are not trained in it, 
you can refer the client to a certified practitioner of  Time- 
Line Therapy@. In addition, it may be appropriate to have 
a psychiatrist or a psychologist work with the client. 
Third,  if  a  client  is  dealing  with cancer  or  another  life- 
threatening disease, you should advise them that hypnosis 
is a controversial form of  treatment and insist that they get 
a diagnosis and a written referral from a medical doctor 
before proceeding. Currently in the US,  it is not illegal to 
use hypnosis to help alleviate the symptoms of  a disease. It 
is illegal to claim to cure disease by means of  hypnosis. In 
most parts of  the world, it is inappropriate to say that you 
will use hypnosis to cure cancer. Here is what I say to the 
client: "What is important here is that I am not going to 
heal you, you are going to heal yourself. Whether or not 
that happens is going to depend on how well you can com- 
municate with  your  Unconscious Mind." That  is  a  very 
important framework for your intervention. You will never 
regret referring someone out if  you have any question on 
whether you should be working with them. 
Developing  Your Induction Style 
Fourth, if  a client is suffering from psychiatric or neurolog- 
ical disorders such as multiple personality schizophrenia, 
bipolar disorders (manic-depressive), hysteria or epileptic 
seizures, it is appropriate for you to require a written refer- 
ral from an MD  or psychiatrist before you even consider 
working with the client. 
Fifth, you should only hypnotize a member of  the oppo- 
site sex when there is a reliable witness present. Erickson, 
for example, would not hypnotize women unless his wife 
was  present.  An  alternate safeguard  is  to  tape  all  your 
sessions. 
Continuous Learning 
There is a wealth of  resources available as you continue to build 
your skills in hypnotherapy. 
You  can pursue an independent study programme offered by the 
American Pacific University, to earn a Bachelor's degree or a doc- 
torate in Clinical Hypnotherapy. The Institute also offers 'hands- 
on'  training at its main campus in Honolulu, Hawaii and at other 
locations throughout the US. The phone number for the Institute is 
800-800-6463. 
A local study group can give you access to the experience and sup- 
port of colleagues, as well as the chance to further practise what 
you have learned. To  find or form a study group, you can call the 
Institute for a list of  people in your area. 
I  offer  beginning  and  advanced  courses  in  Neuro-Linguistic 
Programming and Time-Line Therapy@ in North America, Europe, 
Asia and Australia. The courses emphasize the ties between NLP, 
Time-Line Therapy@ and hypnosis. Information is available from 
Advanced Neuro Dynamics at 800-800-MIND (6463). 
As you build your knowledge and skill in hypnosis and acquaint 
yourself with NLP, visit our Internet site at: 
http:/hww.hypnosis. corn 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
It gives a complete collection of  scripts for hypnosis and NLP, as 
well as a wealth of  further information. 
Your most valuable resource for developing your skills is your 
own Unconscious Mind. I encourage you to talk to it. Listen to 
it. Trust it. 
Appendix 
Short Induction Scripts, 
Without Directions 
Appendix 
Ericksonian Induction No. 1: Question Set Induction 
Have you ever been in a trance before.. . right now? 
(If no:)   Can you remember the state you were in just before 
you completely woke up this morning? 
Did you experience that state as being similar to the wak- 
ing state, or different from the waking state? 
Can you find a spot that you would like to look at com- 
fortably? 
As  you  continue comfortably  looking at  that  spot  for  a 
while, do your eyelids want to blink? (That's right.) 
Will those lids begin to blink one at a time.. . twice or three 
times before they close altogether? (That's right.) 
Rapidly or more slowly? (That's right.) 
Will  they just close,  now,  or will they flutter all by them- 
selves first? 
Will the eyes close more and more as you get more and 
more relaxed? 
That's  right. Can  those eyes now  remain closed  as your 
comfort.. .able to go deeper, just like when you go to sleep? 
Can your comfort go more and more deeply, inside, so that 
you'd  rather not even try to open your eyes? 
Or would you rather really try in vain and find you can- 
not? 
And just when will you soon forget about them altogether 
because your unconscious.. . wants to dream? 
(Insert suggestions.) 
In a moment, I am going to count backwards from 10 to 1, 
and I want you to awaken one tenth of  the way with each 
number until you are fully awake. 10 ... 9.. . B...   etc. 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
Ericksonian Induction No.2:  Arm Levitation 
Have you ever been in a trance before.. . right now? 
Did you experience that state as being similar to the wak- 
ing state, or different from the waking state? 
You can feel comfortable resting your hands gently on your 
thighs, can you not? That's right, don't let them touch each 
other. 
Can those hands rest soo-oo lightly so that the fingertips 
just touch your thighs? 
That's  right. As  they  rest  there  just so lightly  have you 
noticed yet how they tend to lift up a bit all by themselves 
with each breath you take? Good. Now we will  just wait and  see. 
Now,  can you find a spot that you would like to look at 
comfortably? 
As  you  continue comfortably looking at  that  spot  for  a 
while, do your eyelids want to blink? 
Will those lids begin to blink one at a time.. . twice or three 
times before they close altogether? 
Rapidly or more slowly? 
Will they just close, now,  or will they flutter all by them- 
selves first? 
Will the eyes close more and more as you  get more and 
more relaxed? 
That's right. Can those eyes just stay closed as your com- 
fort.. . able to go deeper, just like when you go to sleep? 
Can your comfort go more and more deeply, inside, so that 
you'd  rather not even try to open your eyes? 
Appendix 
14.   Or would you rather really try and find you cannot? 
15.   And just when will you soon forget about them altogether 
because your unconscious.. . wants you to dream!. . . of  lift- 
ing, lifting, lifting? 
16.        Have you noticed your hands lifting, lifting, lifting, even 
more easily, and by themselves.. . as the rest of  your body 
relaxes more and more? 
17.        As that goes on, does one hand  or  the other.. . or maybe 
both. . . continue lifting, lifting, lifting even more? 
18.        And  does that hand  stay up and continue lifting, lifting, 
lifting even higher and higher all by itself? Does the other 
hand want to catch up with it and go up too, or will the 
other hand just relax in your lap? 
19.       That's  right. And  does the hand  continue lifting,  lifting, 
lifting as it is, or will the lifting get smoother or less smooth 
as the hand continues upward toward your face? 
Now.. . Does the hand slow down or go faster and faster as 
it approaches your face deepening your comfort? Will it.. . 
pause  a  bit  before it  finally touches your  face  so  you'll 
know  you  are  really  going into  a  trance? And  it  won't 
touch until your Unconscious.. . is really really ready to let 
you go deeper.. . will it? 
And.. . will your body automatically take a deeper breath 
when that hand.. . touches your face and you really relax 
and experience yourself going deeper and deeper? 
That's  right. And  will  you  even bother  to  notice  you're 
deepening the comfortable as that hand slowly goes back 
to your  lap all by itself? And will your Unconscious be in a 
dream by the time that hand comes to rest? 
(Insert suggestions.) 
In a moment, I am going to count backwards from 10 to 1, 
and I want you to awaken one tenth of  the way with each 
number until you are fully awake. 10 . . . 9 . . . 8 . . . etc." 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
General Hypnosis Paradigm 
A.        PREPARATION. Define desired outcome. Obtain personal 
history. Accomplish pre-talk and suggestibility tests. 
B.         INDUCTION. Use a formal or informal trance induction. 
C.        UTILIZATION. Utilize all of  client's behavior to help them 
achieve and deepen trance. Utilize hypnotic phenomena to 
gauge client's level of  trance. 
CHANGE WORK 
Does your Unconscious Mind know what to do to solve the 
problem? 
Is  it  possible  for  your  Unconscious  Mind  to  heal  the 
condition? 
Is it all right to heal this now or to organize the steps now 
for healing? 
Are  there  any  other  problems  your  Unconscious  Mind 
would like to work on? 
Unconscious Mind, go ahead and heal (client's name). 
How quickly will your Unconscious Mind start the heal- 
ing? How quickly will it finish? 
BRINGING THE CLIENT OUT 
Appendix 
Progressive Test Induction Adapted From Estabrooks 
Close Eyes - Talk Sleep 
Now, if  you would like to just go ahead and see if  you can 
close your eyes. And I wonder if  you can imagine, every- 
body can,  imagining is something you can do, remember 
how much you imagined when you were little, or you can 
just remember a time when you were falling asleep (yawn), 
just falling sound asleep. Now, perhaps you can remember 
a time when you were soo-oo tired, and relaxed.. . all your 
muscles totally.. . relax.. . and just remember a time when 
you  were falling asleep, going into a deep sleep. Deeper 
and  deeper  and  deeper  (etc). That's  right.  Now,  this is 
important, you can stay asleep as long as you want to stay 
asleep until I tell you, and remember, you will always hear 
the sound  of my  voice, however far or deep you go and 
you will always feel just fine and be just fine as a result of 
these suggestions. So, it's OK, just go ahead and fall sound, 
sound  asleep.  Deeper  and  deeper  and  deeper  asleep. 
(Continue for 5 minutes.) You  may or may not remember to 
forget everything that happens. It's OK. 
Eyelids Locked Closed 
Now,  listen. As deeply relaxed as you are, you still know 
your eyes are closed, and you may not have noticed that 
your eyelids feel so heavy that  they  are,  and  they really 
ARE  locked so tightly together that you may find it quite 
amusing to discover that your eyes are locked tight, tight, 
tightly together. That's right. Your eyelids are locked tight- 
ly together and you cannot open your eyes no matter how 
hard  you  try, and  REALLY  try,  the  tighter they  become. 
And you might care to try, so go ahead, I dare you to try 
and find with some amusement that you cannot, 
Relaxation.  Now  relax  everything.  Relax  your  eyelids. 
They are returning to normal, and you are sound asleep. 
Sound, sound asleep,  and you  will sleep until I tell you. 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
Then you will awaken quietly and easily.. . until then, just 
relax everything and sleep, sleep, sleep. 
Stiff Arm 
Now  it's  time for  our next test. So  just notice your  right 
arm, right where it is (describe) is becoming stiff and rigid, 
rigid and stiff. Stiff and rigid. And everyone knows how a 
piece of  iron feels, so rigid and stiff, just like you . . . cannot 
bend your right arm. It's as if  it was an iron bar, solid, rigid, 
and stiff. It is impossible to bend your right arm's so stiff. I 
dare you to find with some amusement you cannot. That's 
right. 
Relaxation. Now relax everything. Relax your right arm. It 
is returning to normal, and you are sound asleep. Sound, 
sound asleep, and you will sleep until I tell you. Then you 
will  awaken  quietly  and  easily. ..  until  then,  just  relax 
everything and sleep, sleep, sleep. 
Weak Legs 
Now,  even though you never thought of  this before, now 
notice it's  as if  your body is floating away, floating away, 
floating away. And you may discover with some delight 
that you cannot control the muscles in your legs, you are so 
relaxed now. And where were you born? Do you remem- 
ber? Remember! Being a little newborn baby.. . And now, 
like then, you're stuck where you are, and your legs won't 
work, too relaxed. That's  right. It is impossible for you to 
even try to stand up, too relaxed. And the harder you may 
try, the more relaxed your legs. You  are just stuck there in 
the chair. You may try, and really try, I dare you. 
Relaxation. Now relax everything. Relax your legs. They 
are returning to normal, and you are sound asleep. Sound, 
sound asleep, and you will sleep until I tell you. Then you 
will  awaken  quietly  and  easily. ..  until  then,  just  relax 
everything and sleep, sleep, sleep. 
Appendix 
Automatic Movement 
Now listen carefully, more fun. It's  time for us to discover 
just what your hands can do. In a moment, I'm  going to 
touch  your hands. Now,  let's  start  your hands  rotating. 
Here they go. Here they go, round and around. Faster and 
faster. Can your Unconscious.. . keep them moving? That's 
right. They ARE  rotating faster and faster. And  you  just 
might find  with some delight you cannot stop them. You 
cannot stop, no matter how hard you try, the harder you 
try, the faster they go around and around. 
Relaxation. Now relax everything. Relax your hands. They 
are returning to rest on your lap, and you are sound asleep. 
Sound, sound asleep, and you  will sleep until I tell you. 
, 
Then you will awaken quietly and easily.. . until then, just 
relax everything and sleep, sleep, sleep. 
Talking in Your Sleep 
Now I want you to dream, and REALLY dream of  talking 
in your sleep. Everyone knows of  someone who talks in 
their sleep. So sleep and have that dream. Now I am going 
to ask you a few simple questions, and you can just remain 
asleep in your dream, and dream you answer me in your 
sleep, talking in your sleep as you have seen people talk in 
their sleep. Soon I'm going to ask questions you will find it 
easy to answer.. . here they are: 
What is your name? 
0 
What is your address? 
Relaxation.  Now  relax  everything.  Your  voice  is  again 
silent and you are sound asleep. Sound, sound asleep, and 
you will sleep until I tell you. Then you will awaken quiet- 
ly and easily.. . until then, just relax everything and sleep, 
sleep, sleep. 
Sleep Walking 
Now in a moment you will stand up. I will help you. You 
will  remain asleep as you  stand  up,  as if  you  were in a 
dream.  You  have  seen  sleepwalkers.  Finding  it  easy  to 
stand up. Now I'm  going to touch you,  to help you. Go 
ahead, stand up. Walk. That's right. You are finding it easy 
to  use  your  leg  muscles  as  you  remain  deeply  asleep. 
Standing up. And as you sit down, go even more deeply 
asleep. You can sit down safely and comfortably. 
Relaxation. Now relax everything. Relax your legs. They 
are returning to normal, and you are sound asleep. Sound, 
sound asleep, and you will sleep until I tell you. Then you 
will  awaken  quietly  and  easily ... until  then,  just  relax 
everything and sleep, sleep, sleep. 
Visual Hallucinations 
Now listen carefully. In a moment you're going to awaken 
from the neck up only. Your mind can remain asleep, and 
your body can remain asleep, but just your head with no 
recognition of  your body can awaken from  the neck  up. 
When you're  ready, just open your eyes. Open them now, 
and  remain  deeply asleep. You  are still  dreaming and  I 
want you to dream of  this tennis ball. Open your eyes and 
look at the tennis ball in my hand. What color is it? Now 
I'm going to turn the ball a little bit so you can see the num- 
ber on it. Once you've got the color and the number, you 
can close your eyes, staying deeply, deeply asleep. 
Relaxation. Now relax everything. Your eyes are returning 
to normal, and you are sound asleep. Sound, sound asleep, 
and you will sleep until I tell you. Then you will awaken 
quietly and easily.. . until then,  just relax everything and 
sleep, sleep, sleep. 
Insert  Post-Hypnotic Suggestions.  Now in a moment  I  am 
going to give  your Unconscious Mind  some suggestions, which 
Appendix 
I would like your Conscious Mind to forget. Forgetting is normal 
and natural. Forgetting is a normal, natural thing.. . you do it all 
the time. W h y  would  you care what you had  for lunch two weeks 
ago, on Wednesday, when it rained? You simply forget it. I  want 
you  to  forget consciously  what  I  am about  to tell  you  in  just  a 
moment. Somebody gives you a slip of  paper and  you forget about 
it. Where did  it go? Who knows, who cares,  just  forget about it. 
Forgetting is a normal, natural  thing. Now, I  would like to sug- 
gest  that.. . (Make suitable  positive, direct  suggestions!)  And  I 
want  you  to  forget  m y  suggestions  consciously  and  remember 
them  unconsciously.. . like  the  piece  of  paper  you've  forgotten 
about.. . like  who cares  what  you  had  for  lunch two weeks ago. 
It's  OK, forgetting's a normal, natural  thing. Forget what I  just 
said. 
Clear Test or  Short-Term  Suggestions 
Now with your eyes closed, stay deeply asleep for a little 
while longer. All suggestions I have given you about this 
trance and all related tests are now removed. All on-going 
suggestions are still in effect. 
Bring the Client out of Trance 
Now  when  you  are  ready,  begin  to  come  back.  In  a 
moment, I am going to count backwards from 10 to 1, and 
I want you to awaken one tenth of  the way with each num- 
ber until you are fully awake. 10.. . 9.. . 8.. . etc. 
Full Body Catalepsy 
(Optional  addition  to  "Progressive  Test  Induction  Based  on 
Estabrooks") 
You  have the option of adding a powerful extra convincer to the 
Progressive Test Induction, following Visual Hallucinations. This 
option  is  Full  Body  Catalepsy.  Before  considering  this  option, 
determine whether the subject has knee, back or neck problems; if 
they have, do not attempt this test. 
We  did  not  include  Full  Body  Catalepsy  in  the  script  for  the 
Progressive Test Induction because it is safest to induce this state 
only with two people present to help with moving the body to the 
suspended position. It is especially important to be sure that the 
shoulders are well supported, to avoid possible injury to the neck. 
This dramatically convincing option is used more commonly in 
the  training of  Hypnotherapists than  in  providing  therapy for 
clients. 
To  induce full body catalepsy, tell the subject to have their whole 
body become stiff and rigid. Once they are experiencing full body 
catalepsy, lean their body back so that their shoulders are solidly sup- 
ported on the seat of  a straight chair. In case the floor is slippery and 
the subject is wearing leather-soled shoes, an assistant needs to 
hold  the subject's  ankles to  prevent  sliding as you  are  leaning 
them back. Now raise the ankles and feet and slide a second chair 
under them. The subject's  cataleptic body will then be suspended 
in mid-air, completely rigid. (Do not put a person or any weight on 
the subject; this could cause injury.) 
To  bring the subject back up, remove the chair from under their 
feet, and lower the feet. Steady the feet against sliding if  necessary, 
and raise the body to standing position. Say, "Remaining in trance, 
just go ahead and relax." Push a chair gently against the backs of 
the subject's legs and tell them to sit back down. 
If  you  are not sure as 'subject'  whether to experience full body 
catalepsy, ask your Unconscious Mind what to do. There is no rea- 
son to experience this test unless you have the desire. I have had 
instances of  students with minor back problems consulting their 
Unconscious  Minds  and  deciding  to  go  ahead  with  full  body 
Appendix 
catalepsy.  Some  of   them  have  seemed  to  experience  a  back 
improvement from the tightening of  the muscles, and they discov- 
ered they could do something they didn't think they could do. 
Elman Pre-Talk 
Make a fist. Relax. 
You  know that if  you wanted to,  you could tighten your 
muscles and make a fist that was so strong that you could- 
n't  make it any stronger or any more powerful. Isn't  that 
true? So, if  you wanted, and if  you knew how, you could 
also make any group of  muscles you wanted so absolutely, 
totally relaxed that unless you removed the relaxation, you 
could relax those muscles to the point where they wouldn't 
work. That is also true, isn't  it? 
Eyelids are the easiest to relax. 
The easiest group of  muscles in your entire body to relax 
are your eyelids. Now,  you  know that's  true, don't  you? 
Remember a time when you were tired, had a rough day, 
and you closed your eyes, and it just feels so good. 
"Now, watch what I do." 
I'm going to close my eyes, and I am going to relax them so 
completely and so deeply that if  I do not take that relax- 
ation away, they won't  work. Nothing that I can do or say 
or think will make them open. Now I can take away the 
relaxation and they will open instantly, but if  the relaxation 
is there, they won't work. 
Now I'm going to try to open my eyes. (Open eyes.) Now I 
tested  myself  to see  that  they  did  work,  and  I  did  the 
wrong thing, because I wanted to test them to be sure they 
do not work. 
"This time I am going to keep them shut." 
This time I am going to relax my eyelids to the point where 
they won't  work. And I am going to hold on to the relax- 
ation and then test them to make sure they do not work. I 
don't have to prove they will work, I can do that every day. 
I know  that I can instantly remove the relaxation by the 
slightest thought, the slightest desire, so I am not going to 
190 
Appendix 
do that this time. This time I'm going to allow them to stay 
totally relaxed, and 1 know that as long as I stay totally 
relaxed, and as long as I do not take that relaxation away, 
nothing I can do or say or think will cause them to open. 
Watch. See, they stay there like an old shoe. And I know it 
looks stupid with my eyebrows going up and down, but it 
feels great! 
"You can do it too!" 
Now, I can feel proud of  myself, because I did it. I can take 
the relaxation away and I can open my eyes. You  know, 5- 
year-old kids can do this; you can do this, too. Just see if 
you  can  do  what  I  do.  Close  your  eyes,  and  put  your 
awareness on your eyelids. You're in charge, you're in con- 
trol, and your muscles have to do what you tell them to do. 
"They respond to what you tell them." 
Not what I tell them to do.. . they respond to you, not me. 
Your eyelids respond to you because the suggestions are 
coming  directly from  you,  and  through  your  neurology. 
You  direct your body to follow those suggestions totally 
and completely, and you will be successful. 
Have the client do it. 
So, go ahead, tell your body to relax your eyelid muscles 
totally  and  completely,  so  deeply  and  completely  that 
unless you  remove  the  relaxation,  they  just  won't  work. 
And  when  you  know  that  you  have  accomplished  this, 
then hold on to the relaxation and give them a good test, 
and notice that they stay shut; make sure they won't work, 
and notice how good that feels. Test them hard, really try. 
client opens eyes:) Congratulations; now prove you can 
relax them so they won't  work. 
Conclusion 
That was the hardest step. You did just great. 
191 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
Elman Induction No.1 
Take a long, deep breath and hold it for a few seconds. And 
as you exhale this breath, allow your eyes to close (Pass fin- 
gers), and let go of  the surface tension in your body. Just let 
your body relax as much as possible, right now. 
Now place your awareness on your eye muscles, and relax 
the muscles around your eyes to the point where they just 
won't  work. When you're  sure they're  so relaxed that as 
long as you  hold on to this relaxation they won't  work, 
hold on to that relaxation and test them to make sure THEY 
WON'T WORK. 
Now,  this  relaxation you  have in  your eyes is  the  same 
quality of  relaxation that I want you to have throughout 
your  whole  body.  So  let  this  quality  of  relaxation flow 
through your whole body from the top of  your head to the 
tips of your toes. 
Now  we  can  deepen  this  relaxation  much  more.  In  a 
moment I'm going to have you open and close your eyes. 
When you close your eyes, that's your signal to let this feel- 
ing of  relaxation become ten times deeper. All you have to 
do is want it to happen, and you can make it happen very 
easily. OK, now, open your eyes. Now close your eyes (Pass 
fingers) and feel that relaxation flowing through your entire 
body, taking you much deeper. Use your wonderful imag- 
ination  and  imagine  your  whole  body  is  covered  and 
wrapped  in  a  warm  blanket  of  relaxation. Now  we  can 
deepen that relaxation much more. In a moment, I'm going 
to  have  you  open  and  close  your  eyes  and  double  the 
relaxation you have now. Make it become twice as deep. 
Once more now, open your eyes. Close your eyes (Pass fin- 
gers) and double your relaxation.. . good. Let every muscle 
in your body become so relaxed that as long as you hold on 
to this quality of  relaxation, every muscle of  your body is 
totally relaxed. 
In a moment, I'm going to have you open and close your 
eyes once more. Again, when you close your eyes, double 
Appendix 
the relaxation you now have. Make it twice as deep. Once 
more, open your eyes.. . close your eyes and double your 
relaxation.. . good. Let every muscle in your body become 
so relaxed  that as long as you hold on to this quality of 
relaxation, every muscle of  your body is totally relaxed. 
In a moment I'm going to lift your hand by the wrist just a 
few inches, and drop it. If  you have followed my instruc- 
tions up to this point, that hand will be so relaxed it will be 
just as loose and limp as a wet dish cloth. It will simply 
plop  down.  Now,  don't  try  to  help  me ...y ou  have  to 
remove the realization and let me do all the lifting, so that 
when I release your hand, it  just  plops down and you'll 
allow yourself to go much deeper. Now the moment your 
hand plops down on your leg, it will send an even deeper 
relaxation through your whole body. Now, that's complete 
physical relaxation. I want you to know there are two ways 
a person can relax. You  can relax physically and you can 
relax mentally. You've  already proved that you can relax 
physically. Now let me show you how to relax mentally. 
In a moment, I'll  ask you to begin slowly counting back- 
wards out loud from 100. Now, here's the secret to mental 
relaxation. With each number you say, double your mental 
relaxation.  With  each  number  you  say,  let  your  mind 
become twice as relaxed. Now, if  you do this, by the time 
you  reach  the  number  98,  or  maybe  even  sooner,  your 
mind will have become so relaxed, you will have actually 
relaxed all the rest of  the numbers that would have come 
after 98,  right out of  your mind. And there just won't  be 
any more numbers. Now, you have to do this; I can't  do it 
for you. Those numbers will leave if  you will them away. 
Now start with the idea that you will make that happen 
and you can easily dispel them from your mind. Want it to 
happen. Will it to happen. Make it happen. 
Now,  say  the first number, 100,  and double your mental 
relaxation. Deeper relaxed. 
Now, double that mental relaxation and let those numbers 
already start to fade.. . 99. Deeper relaxed. 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
Double your mental relaxation. Start to make those num- 
bers  leave.  They'll  go  if   you  will  them  away.  Deeper 
relaxed. Now  they'll  be gone. Dispel them. Banish them. 
Make it happen, you can do it,  I can't  do it for you. Put 
them out. ARE THEY ALL GONE? 
Insert suggestions. 
Bring client out of trance. 
Appendix 
Elman Induction No.2 
Take a long, deep breath and close your eyes. 
Now  relax  the  muscles  around  your  eyes  to  the  point 
where  they  won't  work ... and  pretend  you  can't  open 
them even though you know full well that you can. As long 
as you hold on to this relaxation, you can pretend they just 
won't work. When you're sure they're so relaxed that they 
just won't  work, continue to pretend that they won't work 
and  test  them to make sure THEY  WON'T  WORK. Test 
them hard.. . that's right. 
Now  let the feeling of  relaxation go  right down  to  your 
toes. 
Now  open  your  eyes
-really relax-close your eyes 
again.. . that's it.. . The next time you do this, you'll be able 
to relax even more than you have relaxed. 
Open your eyes.. . now close your eyes.. . double the relax- 
ation. 
Open your eyes.. . now close your eyes.. . double the relax- 
ation. 
Now I'm going to lift your hand and drop it. I want it to be 
as limp as a dishrag. Now the moment your hand  plops 
down on your leg, it will send an even deeper relaxation 
through your whole body. That's  right. 
We  want your mind to be as relaxed as your body is, so I 
want you to start counting from 100 backwards when I tell 
you to. Each time you say a number, double your mental 
relaxation.  With  each  number  you  say,  let  your  mind 
become twice as relaxed. By  the time you get down to 98, 
you'll  be  so  relaxed  the  numbers  won't  be  there. Start 
from 100 and watch them disappear before you get to 98.. . 
double your mental relaxation and watch them start fad- 
ing ....  Now  watch  them  disappear.. .  Now  they'll  be 
gone.. . Isn't that a nice feeling? Are they all gone? Let them 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
disappear.. .. Are they all gone? That's right.. .. 
Insert suggestions. 
Bring client out of trance. 
Bibliography 
Adams,  Paul (1967, 1978). The New  Self Hypnosis, Los Angeles, 
Wilshire Book Company. 
Alman, Brian & Peter Lambrou (1983, 1992). Self Hypnosis, New 
York, Brunner Mazel. 
Arons,  Harry (1967). Handbook of  Self-Hypnosis, Irvington, NJ, 
Power Publishers. 
Arons,  Harry (1969, 1978). Prize Winning Methods of  Hypnosis, 
Irvington, NJ, Power Publishers. 
Arons,  Harry (1953). Techniques of  Speed Hypnosis, S. Orange, NJ, 
Theo Gaus. 
Arons,  Harry  (1948,  1955,  1961).  The  New  Master  Course  in 
Hypnosis, Irvington, NJ, Power Publishers. 
Atkinson, William Walker (1912,1940). Memoy Culture, Chicago, 
IL,  Psychic  Research  Co.  (Yogi  Pub  Society)  (Reprinted  by 
Kessinger Publishing Co.,  Kila, MT, 1998). 
Atkinson,  William  Walker  (1907). Mental  Fascination,  London, 
L.N.Fowler  (Reprinted  by  Kessinger  Publishing  Co.,  Kila,  MT, 
1996). 
Atkinson,  William  Walker  (1912, 1940,  1997). Mind  Power:  The 
Secret of  Mental Magnetism, Chicago, IL, Yogi Publication Society. 
Atkinson,  William  Walker  (1910). Practical Mental  Influence  & 
Mental Fascination,   Chicago,   IL,   Yogi   Publication   Society 
(Reprinted by Kessinger Publishing Co., Kila, MT, 1998). 
Atkinson, William Walker (1901). Thought Force in Business and 
Eveyday Life,  Chicago, IL, The Psychic Research Company. 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
Atkinson,  William  Walker  (1910).  Practical  Mind  Reading, 
Chicago, IL, Yogi Publication Society. 
Atkinson,  William  Walker  (1910). Reincarnation  & The  Law  of 
Karma,  Chicago,  IL,  Yogi  Publication  Society  (Reprinted  by 
Kessinger Publishing Co., Kila, MT, 1996). 
Atkinson, William Walker (1915). Subconscious & Superconscious 
Planes  of  Mind,  London,  L.N.  Fowler  (Reprinted  by  Kessinger 
Publishing Co., Kila, MT, 1998). 
Atkinson, William Walker (1909). Suggestion and Auto Suggestion, 
Chicago,  IL,  The  Progress  Company  (Reprinted  by  Kessinger 
Publishing Co., Kila, MT, 1997). 
Atkinson, William Walker (1915). Suggestion &     Auto-Suggestion, 
London,  L.N.  Fowler  (Reprinted  by  Kessinger  Publishing  Co., 
Kila, MT, 1996). 
Atkinson, William Walker (1915). The Art of  Expression, London, 
L.N. Fowler. 
Atkinson,  William  Walker  (1915).  The Art of   Logical  Thinking, 
London, L.N. Fowler. 
Atkinson, William Walker (1912). The New Psychology, Holyoke, 
MA,  The  Elizabeth  Townd  Co.  (Reprinted  by  Health  Research, 
1996). 
Atkinson,  William  Walker  (1915).  The  New  Psychology:   Its 
Message, Principles & Practice London, L.N. Fowler (Reprinted by 
Kessinger Publishing Co., Kila, MT, 1996). 
Atkinson,  William  Walker  (1915).  The  Psychology  of   Success, 
London, L.N. Fowler. 
Atkinson, William Walker (1915). The Will, London, L.N. Fowler. 
Atkinson,  William  Walker  (1915). Thought  Culture  or Practical 
Mental Training, London, L.N. Fowler. 
Bibliography 
Barth, George (1851). The Mesmerist's Manual of  Phenomena and 
Practice,  London,  H.  Bailliere  (Reprinted  by  Health  Research, 
1998). 
Baudouin,  Charles (1920). Suggestion and Auto Suggestion,  New 
South Wales, George Allen & Unwin. 
Berhardt,  Jules (1968).  Self  Hypnosis,  The Miracle  of   the Mind, 
North Hollywood, CA, Institute for Dynamic Living. 
Bernheim,  H.  (1889,  1947).  Suggestive  Therapeutics,  London, 
London Book Company. 
Binet, Alfred  & Charles Fere (1887). Animal Magnetism, London, 
Kegan, Paul, Trench & Co. 
Binet, Alfred  (1890). On Double  Consciousness, Chicago,  IL,  The 
Open Court Publishing Co. 
Birns,  H.D.  (1968).  Hypnosis:   Unleash  Power  of   Your  Mind 
Without Drugs, New York, Award Books. 
Block, Ed & F.A. Mesmer (1980). Mesmerism, Los Angeles, William 
Kauffman. 
Bodie, Walford (1905). The Bodie Book of  Hypnotism,  Electricity, 
Mental  Suggestion,  Magnetic  Touch,   Clairvoyance,  Telepathy, 
London, The Claxton Press. 
Braid,  James (1843). Braid on Hypnotism (Neurypnology),  New 
York, Julian Press. 
Braid,  James  (1846).  The  Power  of   the  Mind  Over  the  Body, 
London, John Churchill. 
Bramwell,  J.  Milne  (1903).  Hypnotism-Its  History  Practice  & 
Theo y, London, Grant Richards. 
Brenrnan, Margaret & Merton Gill (1947). Hypnotherapy:  Survey 
of  the Literature,  New York, John Wiley & Sons. 
Hypnosis: A Comprehenszve Guide 
Brooks, C. Harry (1922). The Practice of  Auto Suggestion, Dodd, 
Mead and Company. 
Brooks, C. Harry (1922,1940). The Practice of  Auto Suggestion by 
the Method of  E.  Coue, New South Wales, George Allen & Unwin. 
Brown, William (1922). Suggestion and Mental Analysis, London, 
University of  London Press. 
Bryan, William (1962). Legal Aspects of  Hypnosis, Springfield, IL, 
Charles Thomas Publishers. 
Buranelli,  Vincent  (1975). The  Wizard from  Vienna,  New  York, 
Coward, McCann & Co. 
Cannon, Alexander (1936). The Science of  Hypnotism, New York, 
E.P.  Dutton  (Reprinted  by  Kessinger  Publishing  Co.,  Kila,  MT, 
1998). 
Caprio,  Frank  & Joseph Be  (1963). Helping  Yourself  with  Self- 
Hypnosis, Engelwood Cliffs, NJ, Prentice Hall. 
Chaney, Robert G. (1958). Occult Hypnotism, Upland, CA, Astara. 
Cocke, James R (1897). Hypnotism: How It Is Done; Its Uses and 
Dangers, Boston, Lee and Shepard Publishers. 
Colquhoun,   J.C.   (1833).  Animal   Magnetism;   Reports   on 
Experiments, New York, Arno Press (New York Times Press). 
Cook,  William  Wesley  (1901). Practical  Lessons  in  Hypnotism, 
New York, Willey Book Co. 
Corbett, Margaret (1953). How to Improve Your Sight, New York, 
Bonanza Books. 
Cotes,  James (1890). How  to Mesmerize,  Manual .of Instruction, 
Philadelphia, David McKay Company. 
Coue, Emile (1923). My Method, New York, Doubleday, Page & Co. 
Crabtree, Adam (1988). Animal Magnetism, Early Hypnotism,  & 
Psychical   Research   1766-1925,   White   Plains,   NY,    Kraus 
International Publishers. 
Darnton,  Robert  (1968). Mesmerism  and  the  End  of  Enlighten- 
ment, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press. 
Davis, Albert E. (1918). Hypnotism and Treatment by Suggestion, 
London, Simpkin, Marshall, Hamilton, Kent & Co. Ltd. 
De  Saint  Germain,  Comte  C.  (1901).  Practical  Hypnotism, 
Theories & Experiments: Ancient Myste y Unveiled, Chicago, IL, 
Laird & Lee. 
De  Duboir,  Georges  (1922). Mysteries  of   Hypnosis,  London, 
William Rider & Son. 
De  Laurence, L.W.  (1902). Practical  Lessons in  Hypnotism  and 
Magnetism, Chicago, IL, The De Laurence Co. 
Deleuze, J.P.F. (1816). 'A  Critical History of   Animal Magnetism,'  #1 
Issue of  the Magnetizer's Magazine, July 1816. 
Deleuze, J.P.F. (1843, 1879,  1890). Report of  the Experiments on 
Animal Magnetism, New York, Fowler & Welles Co. 
Dods,  John  Bovee  (1886).  The  Philosophy  of   Mesmerism,  and 
Electrical Psychology, London, James Burns. 
Dresser, Annetta Gertrude (1895). The Philosophy of  P.P. Quimby, 
Los Angeles, Devorss & Co. 
Dumont,  Theron  Q.  (1914).  The  Advanced  Course  in  Personal 
Magnetism, London, L.N. Fowler. 
Dumont,  Theron  Q.  (1913).  The  Art  and  Science  of   Personal 
Magnetism, Chicago,  IL,  Yogi  Publication Society  (Reprinted by 
Health Research, 1993). 
Dumont, Theron Q. (1913, 1972). Mental Therapeutics, Chicago, 
IL, Yogi Publication Society. 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
Dumont,  Theron  Q.  (1914).  Personal  Magnetism:  Advanced 
Course, Chicago, IL, Advanced Thought Publishers. 
Dumont, Theron Q.  (1913, 1930). Personal Magnetism, Chicago, 
IL, Yogi Publication Society. 
Dumont, Theron Q.  (1913). Personal Magnetism:  The Secrets of 
Mental Fascination, London, L.N. Fowler. 
Eaves,  Osborne  (1918).  Your  Powers  and  How  to  Use  Them, 
Harrogate, Yorkshire, Talisman Publishers. 
Edmunds,  Simeon  (1961). Hypnotism  and  Psychic Phenomena, 
Los Angeles, Wilshire Press. 
Eldridge, Edward  (1901). Hypnotism: What It Is,  How to Do It, 
Cleveland, OH, The Arthur Westbrook Company. 
Elliot, K.  (1975, 1981). Hypnotism  Theoy and Practice, Toronto, 
Coles Publishing Company. 
Ellsworth, Robert G. (1902). The Key to Hypnotism, Philadelphia, 
David McKay Publishers. 
Elman,  Dave  (1964). Hypnotherapy,  Glenndale, CA,  Westwood 
Publishing. 
Erickson, Milton (1992). Creative Choice In Hypnosis, New York, 
Irvington Publishers. 
Erickson, Milton (Sidney Rosen ed.) (1982).  My  Voice  Will  Go 
With You,  New York, W.W. Norton. 
Erickson, Milton & Cooper (1982). Time Distortion in Hypnosis, 
New York, Irvington Publishers. 
Erickson, Milton & David Gordon (1981). Phoenix, Cupertino, CA, 
Meta Publications. 
Erickson, Milton, Seymour Hershman & Irving I. Secter (1961). The 
Practical  Application  of   Medical  and  Dental  Hypnosis,  New 
York, Julian Press. 
202 
Bibliography 
Erickson, Milton & E. Rossi (1981). Experiencing Hypnosis, New 
York, Irvington Publishers. 
Erickson,  Milton & E.  Rossi  (1983). Healing In  Hypnosis,  New 
York, Irvington Publishers. 
Erickson,  Milton  & E.  Rossi  (1979). Hypnotherapy,  New  York, 
Irvington Publishers. 
Erickson, Milton & E. Rossi (1976). Hypnotic Realities, New York, 
Irvington Publishers. 
Erickson, Milton & E.  Rossi  (1985). Life  Reframing in Hypnosis, 
New York, Irvington Publishers. 
Erickson, Milton & E. Rossi (1986). Mind Body Communication in 
Hypnosis, New York, Irvington Publishers. 
Erickson, Milton & E. Rossi (1989). The February  Man, New York, 
Brunner Mazel. 
Esdaile,  James  (1850,  1960). Mesmerism  in  India  (Hypnosis  in 
Medicine  &  Surgery),  New  York,  Julian  Press/Institute  for 
Research in Hypnosis. 
Estabrooks,  George  (1962). Hypnosis:  Current  Problems,  New 
York, Harper & Row. 
Estabrooks, George H. (1943). Hypnotism, New York, E.P. Dutton. 
Estabrooks, George H.(1947). Spiritism, New York, E.P. Dutton. 
Estabrooks, George H. & N. Gross (1961). The Future of  the Human 
Mind, London, The Museum Press Ltd. 
Forel, August (1927). Psychotherapy and Suggestion or Hypnotism, 
New York, Allied Publishing Co. 
Franquin (1954). Open Your Mind-Course/Mind Control, Sydney, 
Robyn Publications. 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
Freytag,  Fredricka  F.  (1959). The  Hypnoanalysis  of   an Anxiety 
System, New York, The Julian Press. 
Fromm,  Erika  &  Ronald  Shor  (1972).  Hypnosis:   Research 
Development, Chicago, IL, Aldine Publishers. 
Fross,  Garland  (1979).  The  Handbook  of   Hypnotic  Techniques, 
South Orange, NJ, Power Publishers. 
Fry,  T.C.  (1989).  The  Great  Aids  Hoax,  Manchaca,  Health 
Excellence Systems. 
Fuller, Robert C. (1982). Mesmerism and American Cure of  Souls, 
Philadelphia, PA,  University of  Pennsylvania Press. 
Furst,  Arnold  (1969). Post Hypnotic Instructions,  Los  Angeles, 
Wilshire Publishing Co. 
Furst, Arnold (1982). Rapid Induction Hypnosis and Suggestion, 
Los Angeles, Borden Publishing Co. 
Germain, Walter (1981). Hypnotism, Theoy & Practice, Toronto, 
Coles Publishing Company Ltd. 
Germain,  Walter  (1956). The  Magic Power  of   Your  Mind,  New 
York, Hawthorn Books. 
Gibson, Walter (1961). Hypnotism  Through the Ages,  New York, 
Vista House Publishing. 
Gibson,  Walter  (1956). The  Key  to Hypnotism,  New  York,  Key 
Book Co. 
Gilligan, Stephen (1987). Therapeutic Trances, New York, Brunner 
Mazel. 
Gindes, Bernard (1951). New Concepts of  Hypnosis, Los Angeles, 
Wilshire Press. 
Goulding, Mary & Robert Goulding (1979). Changing Lives Through 
Redecision Therapy, New York, Brunner Mazel. 
204 
Bibliography 
Hadley,  Josie  and  Carol  Staudac  (1985). Hypnosis for  Change, 
Oakland, New Harbinger Publishers. 
Haley  Jay  (1967).  Advanced  Techniques  of   Hypnosis  of   MH 
Erickson, New York, Grune & Stratton Publishers. 
Haley, Jay (1985). Conversations  With Milton H.  Erickson, New 
York, Triangle Press. 
Haley Jay (1986). The Power Tactics of  Jesus  Christ, New York, 
Triangle Press. 
Hall,  Manly  Palmer (1939, 1948). Hypnotism,  Los Angeles, CA, 
Philosophical Research Society. 
Hamblin, Henry Thomas (1921). Dynamic Thought, Chicago, IL, 
Yogi Publication Society. 
Harris, Errol E. (1965). The Foundations of  Metaphysics in Science, 
New York, Humanities Press. 
Hart,  Ernest  (1896).  Hypnotism,  Mesmerism  and  Witchcraft, 
Toronto, Coles Reprint. 
Haven, Joseph (1857). Mental Philosophy, New York, Sheldon & Co. 
Havens,  Ronald  &  Catherine  Walters  (1989).  Hypnotherapy 
Scripts, New York, Brunner Mazel. 
Heidenhan,  Rudolf  (1888). Hypnotism  or  Animal  Magnetism, 
London, Kegan, Paul, Trench & Co. 
Heron, William T.  (1950,1957). Clinical Applications of  Suggestion 
and Hypnosis, Springfield, IL, Charles C. Thomas Publishers. 
Hewitt,  William  W.  (1987).  Beyond  Hypnosis:  A  Program  for 
Developing  Your  Psychic  and  Healing  Powers,  St.  Paul  MN, 
Llewellyn Publications. 
Hilgard, Ernest & Josephine Hilgard (1975,1983). Hypnosis in the 
Relief of  Pain, Los Altos, CA, William Kaufman. 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
Hilgard, Ernest (1965). Hypnotic Susceptibility, Jovanovich, New 
York, Harcourt Brace. 
Hjelle, Larry & Daniel Zeigler (1991). Personality Theories, New 
York, McGraw Hill. 
Hock,  Conrad  (1934). The  Four  Temperaments, Milwaukee, The 
Bruce Publishing Co. 
Hollander,  Bernard  (1910). Hypnotism  and Suggestion in  Daily 
Life  & Medical Practice, New York, G.P. Puttnam's Sons. 
Hollander, Bernard (1957). Methods and  Uses  of  Hypnosis, Los 
Angeles, Wilshire Press. 
Hubbard, L. Ron (1951, 1975). Dianetics Today, Los Angeles, The 
Church of  Scientology. 
Hubbard,  L.  Ron  (1951, 1968). Self  Analysis,  Los  Angeles,  The 
Church of  Scientology. 
Hudson,  Thomson Jay (1893, 1904). The  Law  of  Psychic Phen- 
omena, Chicago, IL, A.C. McClurg & Co. (Reprinted by Book Sales 
Incorporated, 1995). 
Humphrey, George (1923). The Story of  Man's Mind, Cambridge, 
Mass., Murray Printing Company. 
Husson,  Mr.  (1836).  Report  on  the  Magnetical  Experiments, 
Boston, D.K. Hitchcock. 
Ince, R.B. (1920). Franz Anton Mesmer -His  Life,  London, Kegan, 
Paul, Trench & Co. 
James,  William  (1890). Principles  of  Psychology  (2  vols),  New 
York, Henry Holt & Co. (Reprinted by Harvard University Press, 
1983). 
James, William (1909). Psychology - Briefer Course (2 vols), New 
York, Henry Holt & Co. (Reprinted by University of  Notre Dame 
Press, 1985). 
Bibliography 
James,  William  (1902,  1961).  Varieties  of   Religious  Experience, 
New York, Collier Books (Reprinted by Random House, 1999). 
Jolowicz,  Ernst  &  Gustav  Heyer  (1931).  Suggestion  Therapy/ 
Hypnosis, London, C.W. Daniel & Co. 
Kahn, Samuel (1945). Suggestion and Hypnotism Made Practical, 
Boston, Meador Publishing Co. 
Kaplan,  Fred  (1982). John  Ellitson  on  Mesmerism,  New  York, 
DaCapo Press. 
Kappas,  John  (1984). Improve  Your  Sex  Life   Through  Self- 
Hypnosis, Van Nuys, CA, Panorama Publishing Co. 
Kappas,  John  (1975,  1987).  Professional  Hypnotism  Manual, 
Engelwood Cliffs, NJ, Prentice Hall. 
Kelly, Sean & Reid Kelly (1985). Hypnosis:  Understanding How It 
Can Work for You,  Reading, MA, Addison Wesley. 
Kingsbury,  George  (1891,  1959).  The  Practice  of   Hypnotic 
Suggestion, Hollywood, CA, Wilshire Press. 
Kingsland, William (1924). Rational Mysticism, London, George 
Allen & Unwin, Ltd. 
Kline,  Milton  V.  (1958). Freud  and Hypnosis,  New  York,  Julian 
Press. 
Klippstein,  Hildegard  (1991).  Ericksonian  Hypnotherapeutic 
Group Inductions, New York, Brunner Mazel. 
Korth, Leslie 0. (1958). Curative Hypnosis, London, Thorsons. 
Krasner, A.M. (1990). The Wizard Within, Irvine, CA, ABH Press. 
Krebs, Stanley L. (1906). The Fundamental Principles of  Hypnosis 
(originally The Law of  Suggestion), New York, Julian Press. 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
Kuhn,  Lesley  & Salvatore Russo  (1958). Modern  Hypnosis, Los 
Angeles, Wilshire Press. 
Lankton, Stephen  R.  ed.  (1989). Ericksonian  Hypnosis:  Mono- 
graph, New York, Brunner Mazel. 
Lankton,  Stephen  R.  &  Carol  A.  Lankton  (1983).  The  Answer 
Within, New York, Brunner Mazel. 
Leitner, Konradi (1953). Hypnotism for Professionals, New York, 
Stravon Publishers. 
LeCron, Leslie (1964). Self  Hypnotism (2 vols), Engelwood Cliffs, 
NJ, Prentice Hall. 
LeCron, Leslie ed. (1948,1952). Experimental Hypnosis, New York, 
MacMillan Publishers. 
LeCron,  Leslie  & J. Bordeau  (1949). Hypnotism  Today  (2 vols), 
New York, Grune & Stratton. 
LeCron,  Leslie  et  al.  (1961) Techniques  of   Hypnotherapy,  New 
York, Julian Press. 
LeCron,  Leslie  (1971). The  Complete  Guide  to  Hypnosis,  New 
York, Harper & Row. 
Lloyd, B.  Layton (1934). Hypnotism in the Treatment of  Disease, 
London, John Bale, Sons & Danielson, Ltd. 
Lovatt,  William  (1933).  Hypnosis  and  Suggestion,  Paternoster 
Row, UK, Rider & Co. 
Loveland, J.S. (1889). Lectures on Mediumship, Chicago, IL, Moses 
Hull & Co. 
Lovern,  John (1991). Pathways  to Reality,  New York,  Brunner 
Mazel. 
Magonet, A. Philip (1957). Hypnosis in Medicine, Los Angeles, CA, 
Wilshire Press. 
208 
Bibliography 
Marcuse, F.  L. (1959). Hypnosis: Fact and Fiction, Baltimore, MD, 
Penguin Books. 
Marks,  Robert  W.  (1947). The  Stoy of   Hypnotism,  New  York, 
Prentice Hall. 
Maynard,  James  (1989).  Transpersonal  Hypnotherapy,  Seattle, 
WA, Transpersonal Press. 
McGill, Ormond (1979). Hypnotism and Mysticism of  India, Los 
Angeles, Weshvood Publishing Co. 
McGill,  Ormond  (1977). Professional  Stage  Hypnotism,  Glenn- 
dale, CA, Westwood Publishing Co. 
McGill, Ormond (1975). The Art of  Stage Hypnotism, Alhambra, 
CA, Borden Publishing. 
Merloo, Joost (1956). Mental Seduction and Menticide,  London, 
Jonathan Cape. 
Moine, Donald & Kenneth Lloyd (1990). Unlimited Selling Power, 
Engelwood Cliffs, NJ, Prentice Hall. 
Moll,  Albert  (1890). Hypnotism  (2 vols),  New  York,  Scribner  & 
Welford (Reprinted by De Capo Press International, 1982). 
Moore, George Foot (1914). Metem-Psychosis, Cambridge, Mass., 
Harvard University Press. 
Munro,  Henry  (1907). A Handbook  of  Suggestive Therapeutics, 
Applied  Hypnotism,  Psychic  Science,  St.  Louis,  C.V.  Mosby 
Publishing Co. 
Neal  & Clark eds. (1900). Hypnotism  and Hypnotic Suggestion, 
New  York,  Rochester 1900  (Reprinted  by  Lindsay  Bradley  IL, 
1987; Health Research, 1996). 
Orton, Lewis (1948). Hypnotism Made Practical (2 vols), London, 
Thorsons. 
Bibliography 
Ousby, William J. (1966). The Theoy and Practice of  Hypnotism, 
London, Thorsons. 
Pavlov, I.P.  (1927, 1960). Conditioned Reflexes,  New York,  Dover 
Publications. 
Pearson,  (1790). A Plain and Rational Account of  the Nature  & 
Eflect of  Animal Magnetism, London, W.  & J. Strafford. 
Peiffer,  Vera  (1996).  Principles  of   Hypnotherapy,   London, 
Thorsons. 
Petrie, Sidney & R. Stone (1968). What Modern Hypnotism Can Do 
For You,  New York,  Hawthorn Books Inc. 
Powers,  Melvin  (1953). Advanced  Techniques  of  Hypnosis,  Los 
Angeles, Wilshire Press. 
Powers,  Melvin (1961). A Practical  Guide       to Self  Hypnosis, Los 
Angeles, Wilshire Press. 
Powers,  Melvin  (1949).  Hypnotism  Revealed,  Los  Angeles, 
Wilshire Press. 
Powers, Melvin (1956,1979). Self  Hypnosis, Los Angeles, Wilshire 
Press. 
Quackenbos,  John  Duncan  (1901).  Hypnotism  in  Mental  and 
Moral Culture, New York, Harper & Bros. 
Quimby, Phinneas Parkhurst (Horatio W. Dresser ed.) (1921,1961). 
The Quimby Manuscripts, Secaucus, NJ, Citadel Press. 
Ramacharaka,  Yogi.  The  Science  of   Psychic  Healing,  London, 
L.N. Fowler. 
Randall,  Frank  H.  (1897). Practical Instruction  in  Mesmerism, 
London, Roxburghe Press, Ltd. 
Randall, Frank H. (1901). Your Mesmeric Forces &            How to Develop 
Them, London, L.N. Fowler (Reprinted by Health Research, 1996). 
Rhodes,   Raphael   (1950).  Hypnosis:   Theory   Practice   and 
Application, Secaucus, NJ, Citadel Press. 
Rhodes, Raphael ed. (1957). Therapy Through Hypnosis, Secaucus, 
NJ, Citadel Press. 
Root-Bernstein, Robert (1993). Rethinking AIDS,  The  Tragic Cost 
of  Premature Consensus, New York, MacMillan. 
Rossi,  Ernest (1980). The Collected Papers of  Milton H. Erickson, 
New York, Irvington Publishers. 
Rossi,  Ernest  (1986). The  Psychobiology of  Mind/Body Healing, 
New York, W.W.  Norton. 
Rossi,  Ernest  (1991).  The  20-Minute  Break,  Los  Angeles,  CA, 
Jeremy P. Tarcher, Inc. 
Rossi,  Ernest & David Cheek  (1988). Mind Body  Therapy,  New 
York, W.W. Norton. 
Sage, X. LaMotte (1897,1901). Hypnotism as it Is, Rochester, NY, 
New York State Publishing Company. 
Salter, Andrew (1949). Conditioned Reflex Therapy, Creative Age 
Press. 
Salter, Andrew (1944). What is Hypnosis? (2  vols), Secaucus, NJ, 
Citadel Press. 
Santanelli (James H. Loryea) (1902,1980). The Law of  Suggestion, 
Columbus, OH, Pyramid Press. 
Satow, Louis (1923). Hypnotism and Suggestion, London, George 
Allen & Unwin. 
Scheflin, Alan & Jerold Shapiro (1989). Trance on Trial, New York, 
Guilford Press. 
Schofield, Alfred (1899). The Unconscious Mind, London, Hodder 
& Stoughton. 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
Bibliography 
Shaftesbury,  Edmund  (1931).  Advanced  Magnetism,  Meriden, 
Conn., Ralston University Press. 
Shaftesbury,  Edmund  (1928).  Be  Your  Own  Doctor,  Meriden, 
Conn., Ralston University Press. 
Shaftesbury, Edmund (1926). Instantaneous Personal Magnetism, 
Meriden,   Conn.,   Ralston   University   Press,   (Reprinted   by 
Kessinger Publishing Co., 1998). 
Shaftesbury,  Edmund  (1936). Life's  Secrets  Revealed,  Meriden, 
Conn., Ralston University Press. 
Shaftesbury, Edmund (1931). Mental Magnetism, Meriden, Conn., 
Ralston University Press (Reprinted by Kessinger Publishing Co., 
1996). 
Shaftesbury,  Edmund  (1929).  Operations  of   the  Other  Mind, 
Meriden, Conn., Ralston University Press. 
Shaftesbury, Edmund (1932). The Great Psychic: The Master Mind, 
Meriden, Conn., Ralston University Press. 
Shaftesbury, Edmund  (1896). Transference  of  Thought,  Meriden, 
Conn., Ralston University Press. 
Shrader,  Wesley (1969). The  Amazing Power  of  Hypnosis,  New 
York, Barnes & Noble. 
Shreeve, Caroline & David Shreeve (1984). The Healing Power of 
Hypnotism, London, Thorsons. 
Sidis, Boris (Introduction by W.  James) (1898). The Psychology of 
Suggestion, New York, D. Appleton & Co. 
Sinett, A.P. (1892). The Rationale of  Mesmerism, London, Kegan, 
Paul & Trench. 
Sparks, Laurence (1962). Self Hypnosis: A Conditioned Reflex, Los 
Angeles, Wilshire Press. 
Spiegel,  David  & Herbert Spiegel (1978). Trance and  Treatment, 
New York, Basic Books. 
Stone, Robert B.  (1976). The Power of  Miracle Metaphysics, West 
Nyack, NY,  Parker Publishing. 
Sturt, Mary (1925). The Psychology of  Time, London, Kegan, Paul, 
Trench, Trubner & Co. 
Tebbetts, Charles (1988). Self Hypnosis & Other Mind-Expanding 
Techniques, Rocklin, CA, Prima Publishing. 
Teitelbaum,  Hyram  (1965).  Hypnosis  Induction  Techniques, 
Springfield, IL, Charles C. Thomas. 
I 
Teste, Alphonse (1843). A Practical Manual of  Animal Magnetism, 
London, H. Balliere. 
Townshend,  Chauncy  Hare  (1854).  Mesmerism  Proved  True, 
London, Thomas Bosworth. 
Tracey, David F.  (1954). How  to  Use Hypnosis,  (2 vols), London, 
Arco Publishing Co. Ltd. 
Tracey David F.  (1952). Hypnosis, New York, Sterling Publishers. 
Tucke, D. Hack, 1884. Sleep Walking and Hypnotism, London, J.A. 
Churchill. 
Tuckey, Lloyd (1889, 1892). Psycho-Therapeutics or Treatment by 
Hypnotism  and  Suggestion,  New  York,  G.P.  Puttnam's  Sons; 
London, Bailliere, Tindall & Cox. 
Van Pelt, S.J. (1950). Hypnotism and The Power Within, New York, 
Skeffington & Son Ltd. 
Van  Pelt,  S.J.  (1958). Secrets  of   Hypnotism,  London,  Neville 
Spearman. 
Van Pelt, S.J., G. Ambrose & G. Newbold (1957). Medical Hypnosis 
Handbook, Hollywood, CA, Wilshire Press. 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
Bibliography 
Van  Vogt,  A.E.  & C.E. Cooke (1965). The Hypnotism Handbook, 
Alhambra, CA, Borden Publishing. 
Verner,  Alexander  (1910). Medical  Hypnotism  and  Suggestion, 
Chicago, IL, Yogi Publication Society. 
Von  Reichenbach,  Baron  (1852).  The  Od  Force,  New  England, 
Hobart & Robbins (Reprinted by Kessinger Publishing Co., 1996). 
Warman,  Edward  (1910).  Psychic  Science  Series-Hypnotism, 
London, A.C. McClurg & Co. 
Watkins,  John  (1986). Hypnotherapeutic  Techniques,  New  York, 
Irvington Publishers. 
Weitzenhoffer,   Andre   M.   (1957).   General   Techniques   of 
Hypnotism, New York, Grune & Stratton. 
Weitzenhoffer, Andre (1989). The Practice of  Hypnotism (2 vols), 
New York, John Wiley & Sons. 
Whipple,  Leander  Edmund  (1893,  1907). Mental Healing,  New 
York, The Metaphysical Publishing Company. 
Wingfield,  Hugh  E.  (1920). An  Introduction  to  Hypnotism, 
London, Bailliere, Tindall & Cox. 
Winn,  Ralph (1939, 1956). Hypnotism  Made Easy,  Los Angeles, 
Wilshire Press. 
Wolberg,  Lewis  (1948). Medical  Hypnosis  (2  vols),  New  York, 
Grune & Stratton. 
Wyckoff,  James (1975). Franz Anton Mesmer,  Between  God and 
Devil, Engelwood Cliffs, NJ, Prentice Hall. 
Wynn,  Ralph  (1939,  1956,  1960).  Scientific  Hypnotism,  Los 
Angeles, Wilshire Press. 
Young, L.E. (1899). The Science of  Hypnotism: The Wonder of  the 
20th Centu y, Baltimore, I & M Ottenheimer. 
214 
Zeig, Jeffrey (1980). A Teaching Seminar with Milton H. Erickson, 
New York, Brunner Mazel. 
Zeig,  Jeffrey & S.  Lankton eds.  (1988). Developing Ericksonian 
Therapy, New York, Brunner Mazel. 
Zeig,  Jeffrey  (1985). Experiencing Erickson,  New  York,  Brunner 
Mazel. 
Zweig,  Stefan  (1932,  1962). Mental  Healers,  New  York,  Viking 
Press. 
A 
'ABCD'  signal, 112 
Achieveable Outcome, 45 
actualizing, 21,22, 66, 136, 145, 
146 
ad-lib, 91 
Adler, Alfred, 14 
Advanced Neuro Dynamics, 
107,175 
age regression, 132 
allopathic, 6 
ambiguity, 29,33,73,109,115 
phonological, 33 
syntactic, 33 
ambiguous language, 25,29 
American Pacific University, 
1 75 
American Institute of 
Hypnotherapy, 95,126 
amnesia, 21, 62-63, 130, 146 
amnesia for suggestions, 21 
analgesia, 62, 64 
anchor, 95 
anesthesia, 62, 64-65 
glove, 62, 64 
anesthetic, 13, 64-65 
Animal Magnetism, 12 
The Answer Within, 126 
arm levitation, 75,  86,91, 136, 
180 
associations, 71 
attention, 4,24,37-38,  44/48! 
70-71/76!  83,85-86,112, 
115-117,120,122-123,148, 
157,167-168 
automatic movement, 62, 64, 
132,183 
Index 
217 
B 
back pain, 186-89 
behavior, 6,19,22, 3940,65, 
70,  79, 83, 86, 96, 99, 112, 
147,157,182 
Behaviorists, 6, 14 
belief, 38, 46, 130 
Bernheim, Hippolyte, iii, 
13-14,142 
Binet, Alfred, 11 
biofeedback, 110-111 
bipolar disorders, 175 
bizarre post-hypnotic 
suggestions, 62 
blinking, 3, 38, 75, 84, 88, 
179-180 
bloodletting, 11 
body positions, 85, 186 
Braid, James, iii, 13, 23, 25, 70 
brain hemispheres, 24 
brain wave patterns, 85 
Bramwell, Milne, 15 
breathing, 24,37,39,74, 85-88, 
90,167-168 
Britain, 15 
Buddha, 52 
C 
cancer, 118,122,174 
catalepsy, 5-6,21,39,  62-63, 66, 
75, 109, 133, 135, 160, 
186-187 
arm, 5-6,39,62-63,66,  75, 
109,131-133,160,184 
full body, 6, 21, 6243,135, 
186 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
Index 
cause and effect, 30, 43,46 
change work, 96-97,121, 
123-124,126,146,182 
chloroform, 13 
choice, 32, 46,77-78,  161,173 
Chopra, Deepak, 3,4,100 
clock, 37 
cocaine, 14 
Colgate University, 129 
coma, 154 
comatose, 62,65,136 
comfortable chair, 167 
Comparative Deletion, 32,47 
comparative words, 32 
Complex Equivalence, 31,46 
compound suggestions, 77 
conditioning, 14,66,158 
confusion, 71 
Conscious Mind, 5,19,21,23, 
29, 39, 64, 72-73,  78, 85, 
99-100,110,120,129,135, 
144,146-148,185 
consciousness, 3,33,110 
context, 33, 99 
continuous learning, 175 
control, 7,  12-13,19-22/43, 
51-52, 132,156,173,184,188 
conversation, 19, 29, 37, 51,111, 
167 
Conversational Postulate, 32 
convincers, 38-39,56-57/63! 
70, 75, 76, 79, 107, 130, 136, 
141,188 
cooperation, 174 
counseling, 69,173 
Counter Examples, 46 
creative visualization, 15 
critical faculty, 152-153 
curiosity, 29, 53,  115-117, 
120-121,123 
D 
Dakota, 151 
Deep Trance Phenomena, 3,66, 
71,129 
deep trance, 3,  11,37, 52, 61, 
64, 66, 71, 111, 129, 136-137, 
141, 146, 148, 151, 153, 157, 
169 
Deep Hypnotic Phenomena 
Tests, 21 
deepening techniques, 3,139, 
141-143,145,147 
deeper hypnotic phenomena, 
129 
deletion, 32,47 
depression     175 
diabetes, 5 
dialogue, 4,29, 105, 115, 
120-121 
internal, 4 
Dictionary and Balloon Test, 54 
direct suggestion, 3, 72,141, 
187 
directing, 29 
disease, 21,99-100,174 
dissociation, 78, 152 
distraction, 71,137 
distress in trance, 61 
double dissociation, 78 
Double Bind, 32, 77-78 
doubt, 71,153 
dreams, 6-7,  20, 75-76,  84, 
88-89,133-134,179,181, 
185-186 
driving trance 19,51,83 
E 
Egypt, 5 
elevator trance, 83 
Elliottson, 12 
Elman, Dave, iii, iv, 16, 65, 66, 
142, 151-164,167,168, 
190-192,192-194,  196 
embedded description, 73 
embedded commands, 73,115 
embedded metaphors, 115, 
123-124,125,141 
epileptic seizures, 175 
Erickson, Milton, iii, 3, 7, 15, 
16, 20, 21, 22, 24, 29, 37, 38, 
39, 57, 66, 69-79,  83, 86, 
95-97,  99, 107, 109,115, 117, 
119,120,121-122,  123,126, 
129, 136, 137, 142, 147, 151, 
157, 162, 167, 169, 175, 
Erickson Foundation, 16 
Ericksonian hypnosis, iv, 16, 
29,57,69-79,83-91,   95-102, 
116, 129, 147, 151, 152, 162, 
167,179-181 
Esdaile, James, 13, 65 
Estabrooks, George, 3,15-16, 
129-130,183,188 
Experiencing Hypnosis, 109, 209 
Extended Quotes, 32 
extroversion, 21 
eyes, 23,62,153,158-159,192 
blinking, 3, 38, 75, 84, 88, 
179-1 80 
closure, 153 
fluttering, 84, 157 
wetness, 168 
eyelids locked closed, 131, 183 
F 
Fargo, 151 
fear, 153-154, 167 
Fere, Charles, 11 
Finger signals, 16 
Finger Vice Test, 55 
fixation, 13,23, 70, 153 
floating, 6243,107, 132, 184 
forgetting, 135,147,187 
formal trance induction, 110 
fractionation, 142,157,159 
Franklin, Benjamin, 12 
Freud, Sigmund, 14 
full body catalepsy, 6,21, 
6243,135,188 
G 
galvanic skin responses, 85 
General Techniques of  Hypnotism, 
16 
General Hypnosis Paradigm, 
95-96,105,110,182 
glove anesthesia, 62, 64 
Gordon, David, 126 
Great Irish Stroker, 11 
Greater Problem, 45 
Greatrakes, Valentine, 11 
guiding, 20,95,109 
Guillotin, 12 
guilt, 99 
H 
hallucination, 64-65,143, 145 
hand rotation, 64,133,144,185 
Harvard University, 15 
healing, 6, 11-12,  21, 23,53, 66, 
86,95,97-98,  100-101,  118, 
122,145-146,182,209 
health, 4, 97-99, 122 
heaviness (sensation of), 54/62, 
63, 77, 84, 116, 131, 160, 167, 
183 
Hehl, Maximilian, 11 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
hierarchy of  issues, 44 
high blood pressure, 5 
Higher Self, 97-98 
History  of  Hypnosis, 15 
Hull, Clark, 15 
Hypnosis, 1, 3-7,  9, 11-16, 
19-24,29-30,32,34,37-40, 
44,46,48, 51-54, 56-57, 59, 
61-66, 69-72,  74,  76,  78, 
83-86,90,95-100,102, 
105-110,112,115-118, 
120-124,126,130,132,  134, 
136-137,142,  144,146-148, 
151-154,156-158,160,162, 
164,168,173-176,180,182, 
184, 186, 189,191,193 
authoritarian, 3, 16, 25, 29, 
69,129,137,146,151-152 
indirect, 3, 15-16,  69-72,  78, 
115, 129, 137, 141, 146, 
151-152 
permissive, 3, 15-16,  25/29, 
69-70,78,115,129,137, 
151-152 
Hypnosis and Suggestibility, , 15 
hypnotherapy, 6-7,20-22/37, 
57, 88, 95, 99, 121, 123, 126, 
129,148,151,167,173,175 
hypnotic phenomena, 6,11, 
21-22,  61, 65, 85, 96, 129, 
136,151,182 
hypnotic intervention, 95, 126 
Hypnotism, 129 
Hypnotism Today, 61 
hysteria, 175 
I 
ideomotor signals, 3, 16, 85, 
103,105, 107,109, 111 
imagination, 55,144,159,192 
imitation, 153 
immune system, 4 
implications, 11, 71, 78 
incomplete sentence, 34 
India, 5, 11, 13, 65 
indirect hypnosis, 3,  15-16, 
69-72,78,115,129,137,141, 
146,151-152, 
indirect suggestion, 72, 129, 
141 
inductions, 11,16,29,39,66, 
69,  70, 78, 83-91, 95, 96, 107, 
109,110,115,121,129-137, 
141, 147, 151, 152, 154, 
157-164,167-169,173-176, 
179-197 
informal trance induction, 96, 
182 
interaction, 51, 53 
internal dialogue, 4 
internal state, 46 
internet, 95, 175 
intervention, 5,  14,45, 79, 
95-96,  106-107,126,152, 
173-174 
generalised, 95 
specific, 95 
T
James, William, 213 
Janet, Pierre, 11 
Journal of  the American Medical 
Association, 14, 118 
Jung, Carl, 14 
K 
kinesthetics, 109 
knee jerk reflex, 14 
koans, 5 
Krasner, A M,  45 
krebiozen, 118-119,122 
L 
La Fontaine, 3 
Language patterns, 25,29-30, 
45,48,115,125 
Lankton, Carol, 126 
Lankton, Stephen, 126 
Lavoisier, 12 
learning, 6-7,20,22-24,30-31, 
66, 69-70,  76, 83, 85, 112, 
115,119,122-124,129,135, 
157,175 
Learning State, 23-24 
LeCron, Leslie, 16, 61, 62, 66, 
99, 153, 
lethargy, 62-63 
levels of  trance, 20-22,  61, 66, 
77,85,153 
levitation, 75, 86, 91, 136, 153, 
180 
Liebault, 13-14 
Life Reframing in Hypnosis, 99 
light trance, 22, 51, 63, 66, 136, 
168,173 
lodestone, 11 
London, 6,12-13 
loops, 115,121,147 
Lost Performative, 30,46 
M 
magnets, 11 
manic depression, 175 
Marquis de Pusseguyr, 12 
massage, 11 
Index 
Master Practitioner training, 
45,99 
matching, 39, 167 
meaning, 12,33,99, 109 
Mesmer, Frans Anton, iii, 11-12 
mesmerism, 12-13/65 
Mesmerism, 13 
metabolism, 5 
metaphor loops, 147 
metaphors, 3, 100,113, 115, 117, 
119-121,123-126,141,147 
MFCC, 174 
Milton Model, 3, 27, 29-31,  33, 
48,71-73,75,115,121 
mind reading, 46, 204 
Mind / Body connection, 3-7, 
23,53,100,118 
misconceptions, 51,154 
Mismatchers, 55-56,  77 
Modal Operators, 47 
model of  the world, 71 
modifier, 33 
monoideaism, 13 
monotony, 153 
MSW, 174 
multiple personality, 5, 175 
multiple metaphors, 147 
multiple embedded 
metaphors, 115,123-125 
multiple loop openings, 123 
multiple-choice questions, 112 
My  Voice Will Go  With  You, 117, 
208 
N 
Nancy, 13-14 
Nancy School of  Hypnosis, 13 
negative hallucinations, 62 
'Negative + until' suggestions, 
77 
nerve cells, 4 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
Index 
Neuro-Linguistic 
Programming (NLP), 4,14, 
15, 16, 39, 45, 61, 95, 99, 122, 
151,152,173,175,176 
neuro-transmitters, 4, 
neurology, 145,156,191 
neurons, 4 
Neurypnology, 13/25 
nominalizations, 31/47 
non-verbal suggestion, 12 
nouns, 31/47 
novocaine, 65 
0 
observation, 14,142,169 
omissions, 48 
open-ended suggestions, 76 
opposite sex, 175 
opposites, 77 
overtrancing, 52 
P 
Pacing, 32 
pain, 6,12-13,  62, 64,153, 173 
Paracelsus, 11 
paradox, 152 
parallels, 120 
Paris, 12 
Parts Integration, 61 
pauses, 73 
Pavlov, Ivan, 15 
pendulum, 3,103,105-112,136 
Pendulum Chart, 107-108,110 
pendulum intervention, 107 
perception, 5, 20 
performance enhancement, 173 
peripheral vision, 23, 38, 
167-168 
Personal History, 3,41,43,45, 
4748,70-71,96,121,174, 
182 
phonological ambiguity, 33 
physical cue, 141 
physiological responses, 85 
physiology, 39, 141, 146, 
168-169 
positive hallucination, 64, 145 
post-hypnotic suggestions, 3, 
6243,129,135-137,139, 
141,143,145-148,169,  186 
Postural Sway, 56-57 
posture, 39,85,167 
power, 3, 5-6,  39, 51, 77, 
117-118,122,124,151 
pre-talk, 3,49,51-53,55,57, 
69-70,  83, 96, 154, 156, 167, 
182, 190 
prediction, 46 
preparation, 70, 74, 96, 164, 182 
presenting problem, 4345,98, 
107,121 
presuppositions, 31/46 
pretence, 153 
Principles of  Psychology, 14 
programming, 4,7,14,95,151, 
173,175 
progressive relaxation, 15 
Progressive Test Induction, 3, 
127,129-131,133,135-137, 
141,147,157,162,183,188 
psychiatry, 69 
psychoanalysis, 14/38 
The Psychobiology of  Mind/Body 
Healing, 23, 118 
psychology, 12,  1P15,146 
Analytical branch, 14 
European, 14 
The Psychology of  Suggestion, 15, 
146 
punctuation, 33, 73 
puns, 71 
Q 
quantum biology, 4 
quantum physics, 4 
Quantum Healing, 100 
Question Set Induction, 83,179 
questioning techniques, 43 
rapport, 3, 7, 16, 19-20, 29, 
37-39,  43/48, 53, 62-63, 65, 
77, 87, 97, 167 
rates of  respiration, 85 
reality, 5,21, 38 
referential index, 32/47 
reframing, 99 
reinforcing, 86, 90,121 
relaxation, 6, 15, 24, 51,6243, 
86,130-134,141,143-145, 
154-163,     183-186, 
190-191,192-194 
mental, 157, 160, 161, 163, 
193-194,196 
progressive, 15 
repeated induction, 141 
response, 32,34,37-39/46,  52, 
73,76-77,112,  142,147-1 48 
responsibility, 98, 152 
reverse order closing, 121, 123 
rhythm, 77,153, 162,167 
root cause, 43,106-107 
Rosen, Sidney, 117 
Rossi, Ernest, 16, 23,99, 109, 
118 
run-on sentence, 33 
Russian Medical Society, 15 
S 
Sanskrit, 11 
schizophrenia, 75 
sciatica, 13 
scope, 33,95,173-174 
scripts, 6, 95, 167,  176-177 
Selectional Restriction 
Violation, 33 
selective thinking, 152-153 
self  hypnosis, 151 
Self Hypnotism, 99 
Shaman, 5 
Shamanism, 76 
shock, 5/71 
short-term suggestions, 135, 
187 
Sidis, Boris, 15, 146 
signals, 3, 16, 85, 103, 105, 107, 
109-112 
sleep, 52,  75-76,84,  88, 105, 
119,129-134,154,179-180, 
183-186 
sleep walking, 134, 186 
sleeping temples, 11 
smell, 62-63 
smoking, 22,129,173 
somnambulism, 6,62,65,161 
somnambulistic trance, 12, 65, 
153 
stage hypnosis, 5/21-22 64, 
147,151 
Sticky (exercise) 111-112 
stiff arm, 131, 184 
stimulus-response, 14 
stories, 69,99, 115, 119-121, 
123-124,126,136 
story-telling, 69 
stress reduction, 173 
stroking, 11 
Hypnosis: A Comprehensive Guide 
7 
Index 
style, 3, 6, 22, 29, 72-73, 115, 
126, 129, 137, 141, 152, 154, 
165,167,169,173,175 
suggestibility tests, 3,  21, 49, 
51,53-57,70,96,182 
suggestions, 3,20-21,  38-39, 
52-57,  62-63,72 75-77, 
84-86,90,95,124,129-131, 
135-137,139,141,143, 
145-148,156-158,161,163, 
168-169,179,181,183, 
186-187,191,194,196 
direct, 3,  72, 141, 187 
indirect, 72, 129, 141 
open-ended, 76 
post-hypnotic, 52, 63, 64, 65, 
129,135-137,141-143, 
145-148,169,186 
Suggestive Therapeutics, 142 
superficial trance, 153 
surface sentence, 73 
surgery, 13/65 
surprise, 71 
synapse, 4 
synchronizing, 51 
syntactic ambiguity, 33 
syphilis, 11 
T 
Tag Question, 31 
talking therapy, 14 
taste, 62-63 
techniques, 3,5-6,11,13-16, 
29, 34, 39, 43, 66, 69-70, 95, 
115,137,139,141-143, 
145-147,152-153,203, 
210-211,214,216,219-220 
television, 5, 19-20 
tension, 158, 192 
Therapeutic Metaphors, 126 
therapy, 5-6,13-15,20,45,53, 
95/98-99!  106-107,135, 137, 
147-1 48,173-1 75,188 
Time-Line Therapy@, 6,45,95, 
98,99,106,107, 173-175 
tonality, 73 
tone of  voice, 73,83,86,117 
touch, 7,  64, 79, 87, 89, 91, 
97-98,109,  111-112, 115, 
133-134,141, 143,180-181, 
185-186 
traditional hypnotism, 129 
trance phenomenon, 20,130, 
141 
trance, 3,5-7,11-17,19-25/29, 
37-40,48,51-53,56-57,   61, 
63-66, 69-73/76-78! 83, 
85-86,89-91/95-96!    98,105, 
107,109-111,115-116,121, 
123,126,129-130,135-137, 
141-143,145-148,151-153, 
157-159,161-164,  167-169, 
173,  179-181,  l82,l87,l88, 
194 
deepening, 3, 37, 65, 86, 89, 
91,137,139,141-143,145, 
147,181 
driving, 19,51, 83 
elevator, 83 
inducing, 16, 37, 51, 56, 65, 
69-70,  86, 95, 115, 126, 135, 
162,173 
light, 22, 51, 62-63, 66, 136, 
153,173 
somnambulistic, 12, 65, 153 
superficial, 153 
trigger, 72, 142, 147, 173 
truisms, 74-75 
trust, 53, 110, 154, 176 
twentieth century, 5,14,15 
Twitmeyer, William, 14-15 
u 
Unconscious Mind, 3-6,  11,16, 
19-20,22-23,25,29,3%39, 
44,48,51,53, 56, 71-78,  85, 
90,96-102,  105-107, 
109-112,115-117,   120-122, 
124,126,135-137,  141, 
143-148,152, 168-169, 
173-174,176,182,186,188 
Unconscious, 3-7,11,16, 
19-23,25,29,33,38-39/44, 
48, 51, 53, 56, 61, 66, 71-78, 
84-85,88-91,95-102, 
105-107,109-112,115-118, 
120-124,126,133,135-137, 
141,143-148,152,  168-169, 
173-174,176,179,  181,182, 
185-186,188 
underlying cause, 105 
Universal Quantifier, 31, 46 
Unspecified Comparison, 32 
Unspecified Predicate, 31 
utilization, 3, 34-35,3740, 51, 
61, 70, 79, 96, 115-116, 137, 
142, 182 
Utilization Exercise, 39, 51 
utilization approach, 70,79 
v 
values, 52, 64, 71/95 
verbs, 31/47 
Vienna, 11-12 
Visual Hallucinations, 134, 186, 
188 
voice, 29, 56, 73, 83, 86, 90, 117, 
131,133,146,168,183,  185 
tone, 73/83, 86,117 
W 
weak legs, 132,184 
weight loss, 73 
Weitzenhoffer, Andre, 16, 64 
Why nots, 77 
The Wizard Within, 45 
Y 
Yale University, 15 
Yes Sets, 74 
Yes-No questions, 111 
z 
Zeig, Jeffrey, 16 
Zen Buddhist, 5 
Zen monasteries, 52 
Other titles from 
Crown House Publishing 
Precision Therapy 
A Professional Manual Of Fast And 
Effective Hypnoanalysis Techniques 
Duncan McColl 
This publication encapsulates the work of  this highly respected British 
therapist. Precision Therapy is an extremely practical book that 
describes how to initiate healing processes. It is eclectic in nature and 
free from dogma and jargon. The book is designed for the therapist- 
healer who does not have the need, the time or the inclination to subject 
clients to protracted mindgames. Its practicality is illustrated in the 
training material: each page is a script or a prompt-sheet that can be 
adapted easily to deal effectively with most problems in a matter of 
hours rather than weeks or months. A comprehensive manual of  fast, 
effective hypnoanalytic techniques designed for the professional. 
"Duncan McColl has provided us with a fresh look at how we do our 
work. It is insightful and provocative. It is scholarly yet remarkably 
free from the language which constantly calls out for the use of  a 
dictionary. It is fresh and invigorating." 
-The Hypnotherapist. 
Duncan McColl is a practicing member of  the International Association of 
Precision Therapists, the International Society for Professional Hypnosis (USA) 
and is a biofeedback, behavioral and management science consultant. He 
served as a pilot in the RAF during the Second World War. He later qualified as 
a chartered accountant and worked as a senior financial and a marketing 
executive in leading British and American companies spending thirty-five years 
abroad, mainly in the United States, Canada, Australia, Mexico and Spain. Since 
1970 he has successfully applied ancient and modern teachings, many of  them 
not available in English, to health and business problems, to stress 
management, creative thinking, psychometric interviewing, and to staff 
motivation and development. 
PAPERBACK 
248 PAGES  ISBN: 1899836187 
Now available in paperback 
Scripts And Strategies In Hypnotherapy 
Volume I 
Roger P.  Allen 
The use of  scripts in induction procedures provides a framework upon 
which to build successful therapy sessions. Written by a practicing 
hypnotherapist, this is a rich, comprehensive source of  scripts and 
strategies to be used by hypnotherapists of  all levels of  experience. 
Areas covered include inductions, deepeners and actual scripts for a 
wide range of  problems, from nail biting to getting a good night's sleep, 
sports performance to past-life recall, pain management to resolving 
sexual problems. All scripts may be used as they stand or adapted for 
specific situations. A runaway bestseller. 
"Imaginative, practical and essential for anyone getting started in 
hypnotherapy." 
-Martin Roberts, Ph.D., author of Change Management Excellence. 
Roger P. Allen is a practising hypnotherapist based in Portsmouth, UK. He 
constantly seeks to improve therapeutic practice by integrating into his sessions 
a wide range of  established and experimental techniques and theories. 
Scripts And Strategies In Hypnotherapy 
Volume I1 
Roger P.  Allen 
The first volume of Scripts and  Strategies in Hypnotherapy was 
published in 1997 to great acclaim. A rich, comprehensive source of 
scripts and strategies to be used by hypnotherapists of  all levels of 
experience, it is now joined by Scripts and  Strategies in Hypnotherapy 
Volume II, an indispensable collection of  further scripts for 
hypnotherapist  ts    that may be used as they stand, or adapted for specific 
situations. 
Areas covered include inductions, deepeners and actual scripts and 
strategies for a wide range of  problems, from nail biting, weight loss and 
amnesia to anxiety, panic attacks and enuresis in children. There is also a 
detailed section on smoking cessation that delivers the powerful 'Single 
Session Stop Smoking Therapy Method'. 
CLOTH 
208 PAGES  ISBN: 1899836691 
PAPERBACK 
176 PAGES  ISBN: 1899836462 
Analytical Hypnotherapy Volume 1 
Theoretical Principles 
Jacquelyne Morison 
with contributions from Georges Philips 
A groundbreaking reference for everyone in the fields of  hypnotherapy, 
psychotherapy and counseling, this book contains a complete 
explication of  the theory behind analytical hypnotherapy. 
An eclectic, wide-ranging book, Analytical Hypnotherapy Volume 1 
examines not only the orthodox analytical approach, but also aspects of 
humanistic thinking and cognitive strategies which concentrate on 
activating the client's  unconscious mind. Containing practical guidance 
on the application of  hypnotic techniques, this book offers numerous 
examples and case studies that cover: transference and counter- 
transference; defensive strategies; dreams and symbolic imagery; and 
therapeutic investigation. 
Presenting a unique investigation into the ways in which analytical 
hypnotherapy has influenced a range of  current therapeutic 
philosophies, Analytical Hypnotherapy Volume 1 presents the clinical 
practitioner with the ultimate means of  treating even the most stubborn 
of  therapeutic disorders. 
"I consider this book ESSENTIAL for anyone involved in 
hypnotherapy." 
-Vera Peiffer, hypnotherapist and author. 
"I believe that practitioners will be enriched by, and clients benefit 
from, the vast corpus of  knowledge and wisdom contained within this 
comprehensively-researched and well-written book." 
-Anne Billings, Fellow of the National Association of Counsellors, 
Hypnotherapists and Psychotherapists. 
Jacquelyne Morison is a hypnotherapist, psychotherapist and stress- 
management counsellor with two private practices. She is a principal 
course tutor and educational advisor to the International College of 
Eclectic Therapies. Formerly an information-technology consultant, a 
technical author, a training manager and a business-studies lecturer, 
Jacquelyne has been involved in training and educational 
documentation for over twenty years. 
Analytical    Hypnotherapy Volume 2 
Practical Applications 
Jacquelyne Morison 
with contributions from Georges Philips 
In this sequel to the highly-acclaimed first volume, Jacquelyne Morison 
introduces the clinical practitioner to the practical applications of 
analytical hypnotherapy
-the process of transforming theory into 
practice. 
Providing a succinct and all-embracing overview of  the topic, the 
author not only removes the mystery enshrouding the practice, but also 
brings analytical hypnotherapy into the mainstream of  clinical 
techniques. 
In-depth case studies and client profiles cover groundbreaking research 
areas, including: fear and anxiety disorders, sorrow and grief disorders, 
anger and rage disorders, post-traumatic stress, the nature of  childhood 
abuse. 
Analytical Hypnotherapy Volume 2 allows the hypnotherapist to 
accomplish an in-depth examination of  the client's  psyche. Equally, 
psychotherapists and counsellors will benefit from this invaluable 
guide, which aptly demonstrates the importance of  hypnotherapy in 
investigative methodology and practice. 
"This book should be all that a therapist, either studying or already 
practising hypnoanalysis, will ever need." 
-Pat Doohan, Fellow of the National Council of Psychotherapists. 
"Analytical Hypnotherapy Volume 2 admirably covers the entire field of 
analytical hypnotherapy with authority, sincerity and obvious 
conviction." 
-William Broom, Chief Executive and Registrar, The General 
Hypnotherapy Standards Council. 
CLOTH 
496 PAGES  ISBN: 1899836853 
CLOTH 
448 PAGES 
ISBN: 1899836772 
Ericksonian Approaches 
Presenting Magically 
A Comprehensive Manual 
Rubin Battino, M.S. & Thomas L. South, Ph.D. 
Already highly acclaimed, this is an outstanding training manual in the 
art of  Ericksonian hypnotherapy. Designed to be easily accessible, it 
provides a systematic approach to learning set against a clinical 
background, developing the reader's learning over twenty-two chapters 
that include the history of  hypnosis, myths and misconceptions, 
rapport-building skills, language forms, basic and advanced inductions, 
utilization of  ideodynamic responses, basic and advanced metaphor, 
and Ericksonian approaches in medicine, dentistry, substance abuse and 
life-challenging diseases. 
Also available: a companion audiotape - ISBN 189983642X  65 mins. 
"This book should undoubtedly be read and re-read by any who 
consider themselves to be hypnotherapists. But it should not be 
limited to them. If  people who are not interested in the subject of 
hypnotherapy are not drawn to it, this will be a loss for anyone who 
uses language in the course of  therapeutic work . . . I highly 
recommend this book." 
-Barry Winbolt, The New Therapist. 
Rubin Battino, M.S. has a private practice in Yellow Springs, Ohio. He teaches 
courses periodically for the Department of  Human Services at Wright State 
University where he holds the rank of  adjunct professor. He has over six years 
of  experience as a facilitator in a Bernie-Siegel-style support group for people 
who have life-threatening diseases and those who support them. He is 
President of  the Milton H. Erickson Society of  Dayton, co-chair of  an ad hoc 
committee to establish certification standards for training in Ericksonian 
hypnotherapy for the societies and institutes affiliated with the Milton H. 
Erickson Foundation. He has developed and teaches courses in Ericksonian 
hypnotherapy at Wright State University with T.L. South. He is Professor 
Emeritus of  chemistry. 
Thomas L. South, Ph.D. has his doctorate in clinical psychology from the Union 
Institute. He has conducted workshops for the Associate Trainers in Clinical 
Hypnosis, and has developed and taught courses in Ericksonian approaches at 
the University of  Dayton and with Rubin Battino at Wright State University. He 
invited the faculty at the Thrd International Congress on Ericksonian 
Approaches to Hypnosis and Psychotherapy. He is the author of  a chapter 
entitled "Hypnosis in Childbirth: A Case Study in Anesthesia." Dr. South is the 
founder and first president of  the Milton H. Erickson Society of  Dayton, and is 
presently a staff psychologist at the Twin Valley Psychiatric System
-Dayton 
Forensic Unit. He has had a private practice for many years. 
 Transforming       Your Stage Presence With NLP 
Tad James, M.S., Ph.D. & David Shephard, B.Sc., D.E.S. 
Whether you are a newcomer or a seasoned professional, Presenting 
Magically will provide you with masterful tips and techniques that will 
transform your presenting skills. Introducing the secrets of  many of the 
world's top presenters, this, the most comprehensive book available on 
the application of NLP to presentation, explores: how to adopt the 
beliefs and attitudes of  master presenters, how to become calm, 
balanced and centred, how to connect with your audience, how to 
structure your language for optimum effect, how to handle hecklers, 
how to use metaphor, how to use gesture to access the unconscious 
mind of the viewer, how to use and own the stage, how to elicit states 
from your audience and anchor them, how to structure presentations to 
fit everyone's learning style, how to to grab the audience's  attention- 
and keep it. 
"If  you want to be an excellent presenter, buy this book. Read it, and try 
out the exercises. It is well worth the price. There is so much in it that 
you will have ideas for improving your performance for the rest of 
your training career." 
-Peter Young, author of Understanding NLP. 
"Written in an accessible manner, the chapters cover a wide range of 
topics and processes that are useful to anyone who presents to others. 
There are many examples, exercises, reflections and models presented. 
It should appeal to both the inexperienced and the seasoned presenter 
-both should find either new ways of  approaching their role or a new 
angle on processes they already use." 
-Carol Harris, Editor, Rapport. 
Tad James, MS., Ph.D. is an innovative trainer whose career as a business 
consultant began in 1982 with the founding of  Profitability Consulting. Since 
1985, Dr. James has also been involved in individual success coaching, 
producing dramatic effects in increasing personal income. Today he is the CEO 
of  a multi-million dollar adult education business. Dr. James has worked with 
Procter and Gamble, American Express, and Northwestern Mutual Life, among 
others. 
David Shephard, B.Sc., D.E.S. is Chairman and Head of  Research & Training for 
The Performance Partnership. David is a Master Trainer of  NLP, Master Trainer 
of  Time Line Therapy, Instructor of  Hypnotherapy and teacher of  Hawaiian 
Huna. He presents public seminars, including Presenting Magically, throughout 
the year. His companies include The Performance Partnership, The Coaching 
Partnership and The Profitability Partnership. 
HARDBACK 
564 PAGES 
ISBN: 189983633.4 
CLOTH 
256 PAGES 
ISBN: 1899836527 
USA b Canadian orders  to: 
Crown House Publishing 
P.O.  Box 2223 
Williston, VT 05495-2223 
Tel: 877-925-1213, Fax: 802-864-7626 
www.crownhouse.co.uk 
A u s t d a s i a n  orders to: 
Footprint Books Pty Ltd 
101 McCarrs Creek Road, PO Box 418, Church Point 
Sydney NSW 2105, Australia 
Tel: +612 9997 3973, Fax: +612 9997 3185 
E-mail: footprintbooks8ozemail.com.au 
UK b Rest of World orders to: 
The Anglo American Book Company Ltd. 
Crown Buildings, Bancyfelin, Carmarthen, Wales SA33 5ND 
Tel: +44 (0)1267 2118801211886, Fax: +44 (011267 211882 
E-mail: books@anglo-american.co.uk 
www. anglo-american.co.uk 